The Divine Cool Breeze 2013 issue 6 – volume twenty-six number six 47

 2. yuva shakti 4 what is yoga 7. open your heart 22. how to please 24. vanity into pride 26. much more 30. twenty-two objects

 TODAY is the day. Now is the time to achieve results of all the work and the effort and the prayers. Now is the time for the feminine consciousness to rise within you, to nourish like a mother's womb. Now is the time when we become really a prophet, not a saint... The time has come. It is great news. Today is the day to receive the blessings of the Divine ... this great Guru on this Earth. Now is the time to ascend. NOWIS THE TIME X/ "Now is the time for me to become..." Pray for God that way.

 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi gave all Her blessings to the Sahaja Yoga youth organization in 1987. She christened it Nirmal Shakti Members of the Yuva Shakti should know • The complete story of the Divine Life of Shri Mataji Everything about the genesis and growth of Sahaja Yoga • Everything that has been told by Shri Mataji about the subtle system • Everything about meditation as a way of keeping oneself in balance and purity • Everything about the prophecies heralding the advent of Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga • Knowledge of the great swayambhus and manifestations of India • Knowledge of the Adi Gurus and saints The Yuva Shakti is an absolutely integral part of Sahaja Yoga SC The Yuva Shakti is an integral part of this Divine Tree of Sahaja Yoga. It is our sacred duty to ensure that we pass on this great legacy to the future generations.

 Yuva Sangha The purpose of the Yuva Shakti is the development of the personality in order to make it much more complete., so that such developed individuals will prove to be great assets to Sahaja Yoga and serve as shining ideals for others to emulate and derive inspiration. They should also know • The heritage and great cultural traditions of India • Indian classical music and the ability to play at least one instrument • Classical dance and drama • The great historical personalities of India • The social, political and economic climate and current affairs • The ability to speak and understand Hindi and English The Yuva Shakti is one Its members should not claim affiliation or special attachment to any centre, city, state or country. Wherever they may go in the world, they should always volunteer their services to the collective. Yuva Shakti members have to be polite and respectful to senior Sahaja Yogis. Their hallmark should be the madhurya or sweetness. Boys and girls of the Yuva Shakti should not neglect their studies in the name of Sahaja Yoga work. Self-respect and self-esteem of Yuva Shakti members has to be maintained. Nothing precludes the use of common sense. based on notes taken during a 1987 conversation with Shri Mataji 3.

 In simple words, it is taking your attention to the spirit. This is yoga. What does the Kundalini do? She raises your attention and takes it to the spirit. Only after knowing the spirit, can you know God – not before that. That is why all religions have failed... But those who are not really good seekers may have a three-legged race, as I call it. They will be identified with something else. What is a three-legged race. It is that you are tied with one leg to another personal- ity. Now this could be the job, this could be anything else and you are tied with it and the progress retards. It goes down. Progress in Sahaj Yoga is only possible when your attention is on the spirit. How do you nourish it? That is another point. The only solution is collectivity. A person who is not collectively nourished cannot grow. He cannot grow, whatever he may try. These are the two very important points of Sahaja Yoga... It is so simple as that. Everything is so simple which you people have made so complicated. What is Sahaja Yoga? It is the right of every seeker to have this con- nection with the Divine. 10 November 1980 London We have to find our reason, our purpose. And that is what Kundalini Yoga is. It is a living thing. It is the breakthrough. It is the one. It is the revolutionary last step... Now what is religion? The religion is the sustenance within us, which 9 October 1981 Vancouver is also a living force. what is

 the revolutionary last step yoga? LO

 In January of 1982 a seminar was held in the Indian town of Lonavala, between Mumbai and Pune. Attended by Sahaja Yogis on the annual India tour, the three day seminar included at least thirteen recorded talks and conversations with Shri Mataji and a puja. It was a unique event. Open Your Heart It is such a pleasure to meet so many Sahaja Yogis from all over the world and to be able to talk to them. They understand Me the best in this whole world. It is impossible to have a rapport with a person who is not a Sahaja Yogi. Even if you give them Realization, if they have not become Sahaja Yogis, then it is very difficult to make them understand the subtleties of their own being. Today, as we are all Sahaja Yogis here, I would like to tell you about the growth of the being on the subtler plane. Technique and spontaneity The trouble with Sahaja Yogis, as they are today: they are all technocrats already. They have done so much of technical things that it is better that they should forget about technique and worry more about spontaneity. The technique is so much that the technique has killed the spontaneity and a balance has to be struck between technique and the spontaneity. First you get your Realization by spontaneity – sahaja... Naturally, by temperament, you are technocrats. You want to have a technique, the tantra, the mechanism, how to work out the mechanism.... One has to realize that you have to become subtler. Then again the question is "How to become?" How to become subtler is the problem... Being Sahaja Yogis, you must attack it from a subtler point. That is how your wisdom will also become subtler. Your attitude also will become sub- tler. To attack such a question from subtle point of view, we have to first of all know that we are Sahaja Yogis. No technique is needed. Just see your vibrations on this question to begin with. It is very simple. Subtler things are the simpler things. Gross things are complicated. It is very simple, a very simple equation...

 Bhakti and intellect We are very right-sided people. All the Sahaja Yogis today, 99.9 per- cent are right-sided. Even Indians are. The bhakti people are lost. They are not yet here. They are another mad people. They are going to this Pandhari temple, praying to God. They are in the churches. They are in the temples. They are in the mosques. Everywhere they are lost. So those who worship the moon, worship the bhakti, the so-called love of God, are lost to Sahaja Yoga for the time being. More the intel- lectuals are here because they really ... sound more sane than the other. But this movement towards the right is overdone. So now, to bring Sahaja Yogis to normalcy is to bring them to the left side, as they are today. That is why I took you down to villages, where people are very simple, very loving, very affectionate... Under these circumstances, one has to think of those people who really love God. There is bhakti. There is devotion. They do not think. They do not worry. They are blindly following God. They know there is God and they said, "We will meet God sometime." Whatever mis- takes they are creating, as you have committed mistakes with your right-sided behaviour, with the left-side also, they are committing lots of mistakes, no doubt. But they are to be brought in. You have to meet them and they have to meet you. They will have a good effect on you. I know they will have. To become the moon now is not so easy because once you have become the sun – rather difficult – you have gone a little Pandhari temple: the temple in Pandharpur India, ahead. But to become the moon, you have to develop that shraddha, near Solapur and Pune that faith, that non-thinking faith, that love. become the moon develop that shraddha that non-thinking faith that love

 6.

 Start with your heart One may ask, “From where do you start when you sit for medita- tion...?" It is all again technique. Only one technique I would prescribe for you people. Every group requires a different type of a technique for the kind of problems they face. For you, it is that you start with your heart and end there only. It starts from your heart, from your Atma and ends in your Atma. Just give up talking about it. Just start feeling your heart. Just start feeling your heart, opening it out – not your mouth so much as your heart. What do we do when we love? What is the sign and symptom? I don't know in the West if that glimpse of love is also there or not. The domain of the spirit In Sahaja Yoga, you do not have to sacrifice anything – neither money, nor your sleep – which is very important – nor your comforts, nothing. Everything you get cheap. You see this blessing. And what is promised to you is swaraj in the real sense. It is the domain of your spirit. The liberation of the highest type is promised, which you have achieved. And sacrifice is zero. You can't even sacrifice time. your You do not have to sacrifice anything. Nothing is to be sacrificed. Always, you get an added advantage in this way or that way. You are blessed every moment. Count your blessings. And then one should start understanding that these blessings are for us to become more lov- ing, more generous and sacrificing. The idea that we are sacrificing is itself an ego-oriented idea. What sacrifice? What do we have to sacrifice? I mean supposing I do you say, "I am sacrificing." It is nonsense because that is My nature. I have to jolly well do it. I can’t help it. I can't run away. If I run away from you, My vibrations will make Me, bloat Me like this. I won't be able to even walk. I have to give. In the same way, you have to give Real- ization. I have to give you have to give realization

 11 101.AL

 Take responsibility If you think, "In my house, oh, I do lots of meditation, Mother. I give further. exclusively. I am exclusive," you are finished. You cannot go You may have your own conception that you are going further with it. You are absolutely wrong. I allow you to continue with your myths. That does not mean that it is true. People ask Me, "How many times should we attend the program? How many times should we meditate?" Every moment. You have to take responsibility of Sahaja Yoga now. You have to become responsible for it in your own way. You have to do it because you are doing it for the greater good. The more you think of the greater good it is doing, the better it would be for you. All these are the quali- ties of the left side – the heart, the Atma. Atma is all the time giving. It cannot receive. That is why it is untarnishable, it is insurmountable. Who can surmount it? It is the king of itself. Nobody can dominate. Nothing, no material wealth, nothing can dominate it. It is above. So to get to a subtler life, take to a spiritual life, they say. But spiri- tual life means what? They do not understand. And spirit in the Eng- lish language, it is such a misnomer that for three things they use one word “spirit." Can you imagine? For the dead, for the spirit that they | allow to drink and the spirit, so-called, that exists within them. It is absurd to you give such a name, one name to the three things, which are absolutely continue with contradicting each other. So, to get to a subtler life, one has to get to the spirit, to the subtle- your myths hs ties of everything. Understand the subtler value In Pune, people wanted to give you some presents. They said, "What should we give?" I said, "Give them the soil of Maharashtra." Every particle is vibrated here, the clay of Maharashtra.... I said give some- thing symbolic and I chose that for you. I wanted to see your reac- tions, what reactions you will have. It was chosen with a purpose. It is a very important thing you are taking with you. It is a very important thing. It is vibrated clay from Maharashtra. It is a very great thing.... The soil is vibrated. There are punyas there. And out of that soil, I wanted to find out something that would be symbolic. I myself went before the puja to select it....

 That is the most important thing you are taking from here. All other things are of utility of a very gross nature. You may try, you can put a plant in it which will give vibrations. I was told that they were asked to send it by ship. It is very wrong. But if I give you a silver thing, you will carry it with you. Will you send it by ship...? To get to subtler things is to understand the subtler values of everything. It can- not be weighed or understood through money. In the West, people buy everything as an investment.... Everything must be standardized because it should have a resale value. Imagine to have everything which is saleable. It means there is no feeling for that thing. They would buy even a certificate the same way, even the bed they sleep in, everything should be resalable. And this is the curse of that country.... If you start understanding things that have vibrations, then you will be amazed that the things that look so insipid, so useless, not resalable at all – you can say worthless, you can call it from all our standards absolutely worthless – could be so much useful. Like one hair of Mohammed-sahib – imagine one hair of Mohammed- sahib – the shroud of Christ, but that also they are selling now. They are making money out of that also. I mean, thanks to these Western people, everything is sale- able. 13

 The living energy Once you start going to the subtler side of the physical things ... they should be the most precious things for you, which is the most pre- people. Which is the most precious energy for us? It is the living energy. The cious energy for you. Our values are changed. We are different synthesized energy of all the energies is the living energy. But we be- lieve in money energy or destructive energies or atomic energies, elec- trical energies, now petrol energies. And all these points will be hit to understand that you have to do without them. So the greatest thing for a Sahaja Yogi is the living energy and the sign of living energy is that it grows and discards all that is useless for it. It knows how to work it out. In the same way, a Sahaja Yogi should know what is important, what is unimportant. You are judged every moment, naturally, be- cause you have entered into the judgment of God.

 Love is subtle This understanding of becoming subtler comes through love. What is love is hard to describe. You can only enjoy it. I enjoy it when a vil- lager brings something so simple... The love we talk of is to be subtler. It becomes really subtler when you really enjoy. Like giving something to someone is one of the ways of judging it. When you start to enjoy giving – not taking, just giving - then you should know on the material level you have felt, you have touched that shore of subtlety on the material level only.... The subtlety of love is that love for a person – not with any reason- ing or with any way of gain or any relationship whatsoever – is to just emit love. Whether you are recognized or not, to just emit love is the subtler way of loving. That love cures people. That love comforts. That is the comforting side. It comforts. To begin with, we should see to the comforts of others. Self-in- dulgence is against that love. People would like to make My bed. All right, they love Me I know, but it must permeate to others. They love Me and second they love themselves. That is no good. Between Me and them there is a big gap. All that is filled by others. Who are the others? They are the Sahaja Yogis. We would never make a bed of another Sahaja Yogi out of love also. It is very difficult. It is too much. But to find out the faults with other Sahaja Yogis – “You got up very early, you opened the tap a bit loudly, I couldn't sleep" this is a very common complaint. “They banged the door early in the morning, they made a noise." Because your brains are out now with thinking, you are so much strained here that you cannot bear any sounds anywhere. I mean people can only live in a churchyard happily, I think, if that is the situation... to just emit love is the subtler way of loving 15

 Be sweet When we start comforting others, to give comfort to their physical body, to their mental body, that is also a very farfetched thing because to say comforting things, to say beautiful things to others is regarded as I don't know what. In the West, it is very hard to find people who can find words to say sweet things to others.... Speak sweet words. Say something sweet. Be kind and nice. It is so nice to hear that you are sweet to each other. When people come and tell Me that such-and-such Sahaja Yogi "came and comforted me and was very kind," I really feel Sahaja Yoga is working in a big way. I feel it in a very big way.... Try to mold your Vishuddhi in a proper way, otherwise you will have Vishuddhi troubles, I must say. Try to use language which is ex- tremely sweet. It does not mean hypocrisy no. You are great in- side. You want to love, but there is a barrier of your ego. When your light of love passes through that ego, it gets falsified, it gets ruined, it gets spoiled and then you say harsh words to others. Try to be sweet through your Vishuddhi chakra. Once you start doing that, you will develop your witness state very well because, first of all, you witness yourself, which is trying to be nasty to others and enjoying that nasti- ness. There is a Hitler sitting in your Vishuddhi and that Hitler you start seeing... It wants to say something very harsh because that appeals to your ego, which we call as intelligence. You see what your misidenti- fications are. You see. “You are very intelligent, very sharp." That is only ego or one of the agents of ego. So try to be sweet in your tongue. It is very easy to make fun of people for small things here and there... But when we start making fun of others, we also become a target of fun. you are great inside you want to love you but there is a barrier

 You are Sahaja Yogis Now that you have become Sahaja Yogis, you are no more English, Indians, Americans – nothing. You are Sahaja Yogis. You belong to a very, very great organization of God. And Sahaja Yoga is the place where you have to learn in every way. Indians have to learn how to be honest and English have to learn how to love. Americans have to learn how to be self-respecting. All of us have to learn, give up what we had, our identifications, and we have to become subtler and universal and people of such values that anybody who sees will say that in America Mother has created Abraham Lincolns, in Russia Tolstoys, in Maharashtra Shivajis. I am too ambitious, I should say, but I see reality in you and reality in Myself. On that basis, I say, one has to create people of that special quality, who have sterling qualities, spiritual qualities which are so subtle, so beautiful, so sweet, so understanding and still, just like steel, nobody can budge them from their own principles, tattwas. That is what it is – so simple as that. And then you start enjoying your love, enjoying your virtues, enjoying everything and having compassion for others. 17

 Then you do not catch. You catch because you do not have compassion. In com- passion you will never catch – never. A mother never gets a disease from her child. She never gets a disease from her child, it is a fact. The child may be a tuberculosis patient or could be any patient. She never catches because she loves. In the same way, when you really love, you will never catch anything. Then what is the question of what is to clear, where to clear, what to do? What does it matter? You are just flowing your heart. At this moment, My children, My Sahaja Yogis are at that level that they can completely open their heart without any fear. It is a very different stage you have reached now. You are at a different stage. Just assume your powers. Know that you are that. Just open your heart.... There should be no fear. There will be no problem. Material problems are not difficult to be solved.... I have known of some Sahaja Yogis who have been in Sahaja Yoga six, seven but still they are frightened about their physical body, the troubles they have years, had and this and that. If they can just leave that fear, they will get out of it. It is such a vicious circle.... We are afraid that our heart will again be caught up into nonsen- sical things, so we do not want to open our heart. That fear I can understand. But now that you are Sahaja Yogis, it is finished. Ask all these people to get lost. All these fears, you should ask them to get lost. 18

 You are the spirit When you discover that you are the spirit, you are that powerful spirit. Just try to steady how it feels happy. It is very simple. When do you feel really happy? It is when you give something, but not to Mataji only.... If I take something from you, you will feel very happy about it, I know. But to somebody else, give some love and comfort. What a great power this voice and this vani has, that you can comfort others by saying good things. Can you imagine what a power God has given you? Without spending a single paise, you can comfort others only by saying good things. If you say a mantra, you will comfort them more in a subtle way. If you instill the love of God within them, it is even greater. And the joy of that is so much because the spirit is joy. The more you open it out, the more light comes in, the more it works out. So give up that fear which is placed within you in your experiences. Now this is a new experience of a new life, where your energy comes from the spirit, which is love. In one word: it is love. And in three words: it is truth, it is attention and it is joy. All put together, it is love. When you mix them up, it becomes love. And that is what you have. It is the great power of love. Through your attention you love others. Even attention is sufficient. Be attentive.... To win over other people is also this way – to be kind to them, to give to them. But to give them Realization is the highest thing. in one word it is love and in three words it is truth it is attention and it is joy

 Sympathy and love When you become subtler and subtler, you will see that you will not have sympathies with people who are afflicted – not sympathies, but will have love for them. There is a big difference between sympa- you thy and love. When you have sympathy, that means what? You share pathos. If you want to share pathos, share. It is a very good idea is to share pathos. But if you want to share joy, you will not have sympa- thy, you will have love. You want to share your joy of your spirit with another person, so you may talk to that person in a way that may not look so much pleasing and falling at his feet. You see, this is the work of politicians or business people, not yours. You are not seeking any business out of them. You want them to come to Realization, so you have to say which things are wrong very firmly. With a real firm hand you have to say, "This is absolutely wrong, absurd." You have to con- CC כ vince on that point.... That is also love. So love is the strongest thing and the sweetest thing. It is such a beautiful combination and only the one who has the wisdom, that subtler wisdom, can achieve it. Now again the mind will work, “How to do it?" I think all of you should put this word “how" into the sea. There is another good very word in the English language which you should use: “why not." That is the way you can assure yourself, ascertain yourself, work it out that way into a complete blessing of God. You have to just pass those blessings to others, that's all. Nothing accept love more is to be done. Just pass that light to others. For that, what you need is a man who has accepted love as his career, a man who wor- as a career ships love, a person who thinks love is above all. We extend our love to Him and ask Him to create love in the hearts of people who worship Him. Those who worship Surya, must know that Christ resides in that centre, who was nothing but love. All His life He loved. He sacrificed Himself because He loved you so much that He wanted you all to get into the kingdom of God. He sacrificed Himself at the altar of God's forbidden territories. He made it possible for you to go there by sucking your ego and superego. He is the mes- senger of love who was born on the Surya. So to do the greatest justice to Surya is to decide today that you will take up love as your worshipping, as your puja. all. May God bless 20 you

 **..

 How can we please you best? I have no desires. I do not know. You see, inside Me is complete peace and complete satisfaction. There is nothing that is needed inside. But the ripples of that joy flow outward all the time. And when it reaches your shores, it comes back. And it weaves a beautiful pattern. And I see the pattern. The reciprocity, how much you reciprocate, is the way the pattern is beautiful. It is delicate. It is powerful. It is so soothing and it weaves the complete beauty of bhakti, so much so that this ocean of joy itself gets turbulent and I really swing with it. And it is not easy to describe that beautiful feeling of tremendous joy. The first thing – with all My heart, with all My soul. In you have to know is that I love you very much the same way, try to love Me with all sincerity and trust.... I will speak for one minute about this meditation. Yesterday I told you about putting your attention to different areas, the pradesh or the chakras.... When you pay attention to the chakras, where you pay attention is the point. Actually, you pay attention to the Deity. Now this Deity, supposing you are taking the name of Shri Ram, you are trying to establish Shri Ram within your heart, the right Heart chakra. Now at that time what do you do? You say the mantra. But there is another way which is easier because you are saying a mantra in a way that is not so much intelligible there to Shri Ram. But first of all, if you study the quali- ties of Shri Ram, what were His qualities? And if you manifest those qualities through your character, then it is very easy to please Shri Ram. What is the quality of Shri Ganesh? He is entirely surrendered to Mother. Even the Father does not bother Him. What is the quality of Christ? He forgives those who have crucified Him. He can go through all kinds of tapas. What is the quality of Shri Krishna, for whom everything is a leela? Like that, when you take the name of Shri Krishna, do you see everything as a witness? If effortlessly that happens to you, you should know that you have established Shri Krishna. It is the most difficult thing to establish Me because I am Mahamaya and the facets are so many – sixteen thousand into, raised to the power of one thousand. 6 May 1984 Rouen France 22

 174

 Vanity into Pride NOT E GO Vanity must be made into pride. You should be proud that you are Sahaja Yogis, really proud. Raise you heads with pride that “we are Sahaja Yogis." CC Pride comes Pride is never oppressive. It is a glorious thing to be proud. Actually pride is because you achieve something in life.. nothing but the expression of self-esteem. Begging, borrowing, mimicry, all It is good to have pride. There is a these things come from the less understanding of yourself. So vanity should be difference between vanity and pride. Pride means you the pride and the pride should be the expression of self-esteem. Self-esteem is very different from ego. One is reality, another is complete have really achieved something and you artificiality.... So you have to be not egotistical but proud – proud that you are are proud of it. And vanity means you have achieved nothing and you are Sahaja Yogis, proud that you are born at such a time when you have to carry on the duties of God's work, that God has chosen you so that you should proud of it. come up to that level. Some people I find suddenly become morose recluses in Sahaja Yoga. They will never be forgiven because God has given them so much. Supposing some- body gives you a diamond. You are proud. You put it on and show off. But when have been given your spirit, you should be proud and not to behave you like recluses. Some people feel, "I shall not do any job now. I'll not go out. I’ll sit at home and meditate." There is no place for such people in Sahaja Yoga. "I can't do this." The word “can't" should go away from the dictionary of people who are supposed to be Sahaja Yogis. You just cannot say, "I can't do it." So the self-esteem will give you that kind of a dynamism which is needed for Sahaja Yoga – a discreet dynamism, a wise dynamism. I won't have to solve your problems any more. Birthday Puja 1983

 more You all have depth, a very deep personality within yourself – but we have to touch that. That is very important because we sing, have music. That is very good thing. That we enjoy each other's company also is a very good. And that is a nice thing. But we have to enjoy our own company also by meditating and going within. "Now, what is the use?" one may ask. "Mother, now we have got Realization, we have a nice life, we are enjoying ourselves, we are doing so well." The deeper you go, the deeper you touch the essences of all the things like all the elements.... All elements have got an effect if a saint wants to have an effect. But first of all, 6 May 1987 you must reach your own essences. Once you reach your own essences, then you Sydney reach the essences of all the elements and then you can handle all the elements as you like or you can order them as you like. First they will act, expressing that they have been touched... Then later on you can command and you can ask the rain to come. To work out many things of that kind, we have to be deep people, we have to go much deeper within ourselves to touch our essences.... While doing so, actually we move horizontally. When we start moving horizontally, at the core of it we find that there are these essences placed and these essences then start exciting the essences across. Like in the radio you have seen there is ether. Now when you speak on one side of the radio, it gets completely manifested in the essence of the ether and then everybody can hear it. Now when you people just give a bandhan, sometimes you find that you have communicated with another person. But that is only the essence of the ether – we can say the subtler of the subtlest. People have only gone onto the subtler side, we can say, by science. But you go to the subtler side and that subtler side gives you all these effects.... All the essences are working out for you, as well as all the Deities are working you are the out for you. They are very anxious that these things should be done and channels for them to work it out. 27

 Being effective My horizontal movement is quite large and is very subtle and I do it quietly. But you must also understand that you can do a lot by your horizontal movement. By horizontal movement, what happens is that you start meditating on a particular subject which is a very bothersome subject and which is for the destruction of humanity. Anything – you just put your attention to it and meditate. If you are that deep, that means if your calibre has improved to that extent, you will immediately put an effect on that. Immediately you will see there will be a change, there will be something happening in that direction. This your power which you have to actually develop. So we have to meditate and, by meditation, we develop that strength within us, so is automatically we start solving the problem. Like our antenna grows up to that point. The way we are strong inside, they grow outside to help so many things which are to be helped. Now you see that people are realizing that the world is in a great mess and there are lots of problems that have come through materialism, through wrong thinking, through emotional thinking, through stupidity we can say. We have no time for all this. What we have to do is to develop ourselves deeper and deeper and deeper, so that on the horizon- tal plane also we are effective. Beyond yourself Sahaja Yoga first of all is for personal improvement. It is for the inner improvement as far as the personal side is concerned. That means your intelligence must improve, your temperament must improve, your heart must clear out, your feelings must be all right. health should be all right. Then your relationship with others should be all Then your All these things are there. right. Your ego should go away. Your superego should go away. But this only helps a personality, just a personality that is very limited. That is yourself. But now this personality can become an instrument, if you can develop that depth within yourself. Normally what happens is that people are very much still worried about themselves – say about their wives, about their children, about their husbands or their household or this and that. These are not important things because we have to be those instruments which are like pilotless bombs. We have to develop that depth within us. That depth is possible and you can really cure many problems of your country if you could just meditate on them.... It is important that you also develop those deeper feelings within you, a deeper sense within you. But mostly people are a very superficial type. They just think about their body, their impressions, how they carry themselves. At the most they will think we have to be very legal-minded or we have to be at the most not drinking, not smoking and when all these things are achieved we have achieved everything. But I think that is not so. 28

 Affecting change The second point is that we think that if we love each other, if we love much Mother, that is the end of everything. It is not true also because your love for Me is there, no doubt, and it should be intense, it should be deeper. But the deeper you go into that love, then you will be surprised how you receive a special quality of correcting the things that are wrong around you. Gradu- ally that quality improves. more For example, if a Sahaja Yogi goes to anybody's house, that house must become auspicious. But such a Sahaja Yogi must have a good heart. If the heart is not good – in the heart there is still anger, passion, lust, greed – then such a heart won't affect. But a person who has purified himself, if he goes into any family, any household, any society, the whole change will take place. The circumstances will change. Things that do not work out will start working out immediately.... Wherever a saint goes, things are changing. But you have to be a saint and a saintly person has a very deep understanding of another person and this is what it is lacking. We do not have that deep understanding for each other. Even if you have it for some of your own friends or maybe in the same ashram that you are staying ... it should deepen much more. You should go further and further. The new course think of Me it works out.... But first of all, the meditative process If you should be increased. We all must meditate. That is very important. Meditate sincerely – not just because we have to meditate, but because we have to be deep, we have to grow within to express our great powers of divine love, you all can to correct so many things, which you can do very easily. I know do it. There is no need to have big degrees for that, a big education for that. Nothing is needed. What is needed is a deep feeling of love for the whole universe – and that changes. The all-destructive forces change their course and it is then for the constructive forces. But on the whole, that works out much faster if you all do that medita- tion with sincerity, with intensity, with understanding. May God bless you. It is much more than our music, much more than My lectures or any- thing that we have to do. And now the course has to change. I am sure you people will take to the new course, so may God bless you for that.

 OBJECTS twenty{two TO REACH TO GIVE TO OPEN Life Eternal Trust was created by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi on March 8, 1972 in Mumbai, then Bombay. It was less than two years since the opening of the Sahasrara at Nargol on May 5, 1970. With this document, the Trust was registered with the Charity Commissioner of Greater Bombay. It was drafted and signed by Shri Mataji. It contains twenty-two objectives or “objects." To facilitate the work of Mataji as follows: (1) To expedite the process of spiritual evolution by exciting the residual con- sciousness, i.e. Kundalini, to rise ultimately leading to self-realisation (second birth as defined in the Bible, the Koran, the Indian Scriptures and the great ancient prophets and sages all over the world). (2) To achieve the evolution described in the foregoing paragraph through the method of "Sahaja Yoga," which means effortless, easy, relaxed method of meditation evolved by Mataji. To organize meditation centres for this pur- pose. This completely precludes all the external human efforts like rituals, worships, prayers, recitations, reading, renunciation (i.e. Sanyasa), worship of the preceptor (Guru) or any other physical expressions. (3) By the process, to reach a Zero point where one becomes effortless and starts feeling the play of the supreme. Ultimately to reach the stage where one loses the Ego and one becomes one with the Creator and His creation. (4) To open the minds of people through meetings introducing "thoughtless awareness" which discovers the subtle which at present is lost in gross words, books and dogmas. 30

 Life Elernal Trust TO BUILD TO IMPROVE TO UNITE (5) To introduce the only one internal living religion lying dead and camouflaged under external practices and precepts of religion in all the human beings and for this to organise tours and hold spiritual meet- ings as per wishes of Mataji. (6) To spread the news of the descent of the Divine Grace, with the help of self-realised disciples of Mataji. (7) To cure people of their physical and mental ailments by blessing them with divine healing touch of Mataji and other disciples who have developed their collective consciousness self-realisation. (8) To give the taste of real joy that is within the self. To practice differ- ent methods of meditation evolved by Mataji and to hold meditation camps. (9) To create a new generation of self-realised people and to render motherly protection to all such children against evil intentions and to look after their well-being. (10) To build and run Ashramas of Sadhakas for their use during Sadhana and to promote all activities expressing the new dimensions of creativity. (11) To introduce this work in School, Colleges and other institutions and groups and to run schools for younger people. (12) To improve the aesthetics of behavior and beauty by holding exhi- bitions of art, culture and music and through all activities which speak the universal language of love and beauty by developing the inner sense known as "Ati-Indriya," that enlightens the subtle sensitivities. CC

 (13) To employ the energy of love to overcome hatred that is the cause of wars, disintegration and destruction by publishing and re- lating the spiritual experiences of Sadhakas which prove the univer- sal laws of love. (14) To overcome the void between the material saturation and the unknown which is causing fear, restlessness, sleeplessness and ten- sion leading to escapism from reality and false renunciation. (15) To print, edit and publish journals, books and literature writ- ten by Mataji and her disciples with her approval for conveying the knowledge of truth so that the human beings who are the highest in evolution, rise in their glory, dignity and freedom, as also for publi- cising the activities of the institutions run by the Trust. (16) To distribute to patients simple meditative and oils with Mata- ji's vibrations and of any disciples on instructions from Mataji. (17) To hold press conferences to give a correct picture of the activi- ties of cosmic powers by demonstration or by discussion, as well as of the Life Eternal institutions. (18) To collect books under the guidance of Mataji for libraries. (19) To build sanatoria, hospitals, nursing homes for the sick and invalid. (20) To counteract through mass spiritual power the destructive forces against spiritualism such as evil spirits, the cult of hypnotism, siddhis and the use of "religion" for the exploitation of the innocent. כל CC (21) To unite all genuine seekers of truth divided by dogmas and ignorance so that Satya Yuga (the Age of Truth) is born out of the present Kaliyuga (the Age of Darkness) rather than complete annihi- lation. To harness all the human resources to achieve this great task for which mass evolution will be needed. (22) To open, organise and run local centres of the Life Eternal Insti- tution in various parts of India and in foreign countries, the centres being opened on the distinct understanding that meditation is the path of the entire human destiny, and that all barriers of states, na- tions and races are artificial and irrelevant to Life Eternal.

 STATES, NATIONS AND RACES ARE ARTIFICIAL AND IRRELEVANT TO LIFE ETERNAL THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE volume twenty-six number six www.divinecoolbreeze.org PHOTOGRAPHS COVER: Vaiturna India, 1982 or 1983 (Matthew Fogarty) contact@divinecoolbreeze.org editor@divinecoolbreeze.org PAGES 2 and 3: Sydney Australia, March 1990 (Matthew Fogarty) PAGE 5: Taronga Park Zoo, Sydney Australia, circa 1981 (Matthew Fogarty) PAGES 6 to 18: Lonavala India, January 1982 (Matthew Fogarty) WORDS PAGE 21: Lonavala train station, January 1982 PAGE 1: 25 August 1983, Lausanne Switzerland and 12 May 1980, London PAGE 25: Italy, 2007 (Calin Chirou) BACK COVER: 2 October 1978 London PAGE 26: India, 1982 or 1983 (Matthew Fogarty) "When you make a knot, always there is an unwinding – always. You come by a staircase, you always can go down. Is there a staircase by which you cannot go down, but only come up? In the same way, if you have made a knot there must be a way of going out of the knot. So the going out of the knot is worked out through Sahaja Yoga. That also is done through vibrations." BACK COVER: Jasper National Park, Canada (Anjan Upadhya) PRINTED BY King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India

 Is there a staircase by which you cannot go down, but only come up?



----------------------

2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-0.txt 
 The Divine Cool Breeze
2013 issue 6 – volume twenty-six number six
47
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-1.txt 
 2. yuva shakti
4 what is yoga
7. open your heart
22. how to please
24. vanity into pride
26. much more
30. twenty-two objects
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-2.txt 
 TODAY
is the day. Now is the time to achieve results of all the work and the effort and the prayers.
Now is the time for the feminine consciousness to rise within you,
to nourish like a mother's womb.
Now is the time when we become really a prophet, not a saint...
The time has come. It is great news.
Today is the day to receive the blessings of the Divine ...
this great Guru on this Earth.
Now is the time to ascend.
NOWIS THE TIME
X/
"Now is the time for me to become..." Pray for God that
way.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-3.txt 
 Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi gave all Her blessings
to the Sahaja Yoga youth organization in 1987. She christened it
Nirmal Shakti
Members of the Yuva Shakti should know
• The complete story of the Divine Life of Shri Mataji
Everything about the genesis and growth of Sahaja Yoga
• Everything that has been told by Shri Mataji about the subtle system
• Everything about meditation as a way of keeping oneself in balance and purity
• Everything about the prophecies heralding the advent of Shri Mataji and Sahaja Yoga
• Knowledge of the great swayambhus and manifestations of India
• Knowledge of the Adi Gurus and saints
The Yuva Shakti
is an absolutely integral part
of Sahaja Yoga
SC
The Yuva Shakti is an integral part
of this Divine Tree of Sahaja Yoga.
It is our sacred duty to ensure
that we pass on this great legacy
to the future generations.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Yuva Sangha
The purpose of the Yuva Shakti is the development of the personality
in order to make it much more complete., so that such developed individuals
will prove to be great assets to Sahaja Yoga and serve as shining ideals
for others to emulate and derive inspiration.
They should also know
• The heritage and great cultural traditions of India
• Indian classical music and the ability to play at least one instrument
• Classical dance and drama
• The great historical personalities of India
• The social, political and economic climate and current affairs
• The ability to speak and understand Hindi and English
The Yuva Shakti is one
Its members should not claim affiliation or special attachment to any
centre, city, state or country.
Wherever they may go in the world, they should always volunteer their
services to the collective.
Yuva Shakti members have to be polite and respectful to senior Sahaja
Yogis. Their hallmark should be the madhurya or sweetness.
Boys and girls of the Yuva Shakti should not neglect their studies in the
name of Sahaja Yoga work.
Self-respect and self-esteem of Yuva Shakti members has to be maintained.
Nothing precludes the use of common sense.
based on notes taken during a 1987 conversation with Shri Mataji
3.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-5.txt 
 In simple words, it is taking your attention to the spirit. This is
yoga.
What does the Kundalini do? She raises your attention and takes it to
the spirit. Only after knowing the spirit, can you know God – not before
that. That is why all religions have failed...
But those who are not really good seekers may have a three-legged
race, as I call it. They will be identified with something else. What is a
three-legged race. It is that you are tied with one leg to another personal-
ity. Now this could be the job, this could be anything else and you are tied
with it and the progress retards. It goes down.
Progress in Sahaj Yoga is only possible when your attention is on the
spirit. How do you nourish it? That is another point. The only solution is
collectivity. A person who is not collectively nourished cannot grow. He
cannot grow, whatever he may try.
These are the two very important points of Sahaja Yoga...
It is so simple as that. Everything is so simple which you people have
made so complicated.
What is Sahaja Yoga? It is the right of every seeker to have this con-
nection with the Divine.
10 November 1980 London
We have to find our reason, our purpose. And that is what Kundalini
Yoga is. It is a living thing. It is the breakthrough. It is the one. It is the
revolutionary last step...
Now what is religion? The religion is the sustenance within us, which
9 October 1981 Vancouver
is also a living force.
what is
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-6.txt 
 the revolutionary last step
yoga?
LO
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-8.txt 
 In January of 1982 a seminar was held in the Indian town of Lonavala, between
Mumbai and Pune. Attended by Sahaja Yogis on the annual India tour, the three day
seminar included at least thirteen recorded talks and conversations with Shri Mataji
and a puja. It was a unique event.
Open Your Heart
It is such a pleasure to meet so many Sahaja Yogis from all over the world
and to be able to talk to them. They understand Me the best in this whole
world.
It is impossible to have a rapport with a person who is not a Sahaja
Yogi. Even if you give them Realization, if they have not become Sahaja
Yogis, then it is very difficult to make them understand the subtleties of
their own being. Today, as we are all Sahaja Yogis here, I would like to tell
you about the growth of the being on the subtler plane.
Technique and spontaneity
The trouble with Sahaja Yogis, as they are today: they are all technocrats
already. They have done so much of technical things that it is better that
they should forget about technique and worry more about spontaneity.
The technique is so much that the technique has killed the spontaneity and
a balance has to be struck between technique and the spontaneity.
First you get your Realization by spontaneity – sahaja...
Naturally, by temperament, you are technocrats. You want to have a
technique, the tantra, the mechanism, how to work out the mechanism....
One has to realize that you have to become subtler. Then again the
question is "How to become?" How to become subtler is the problem...
Being Sahaja Yogis, you must attack it from a subtler point. That is how
your wisdom will also become subtler. Your attitude also will become sub-
tler. To attack such a question from subtle point of view, we have to first of
all know that we are Sahaja Yogis. No technique is needed. Just see your
vibrations on this question to begin with. It is very simple. Subtler things
are the simpler things. Gross things are complicated. It is very simple, a
very simple equation...
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Bhakti and intellect
We are very right-sided people. All the Sahaja Yogis today, 99.9 per-
cent are right-sided. Even Indians are.
The bhakti people are lost. They are not yet here. They are another
mad people. They are going to this Pandhari temple, praying to God.
They are in the churches. They are in the temples. They are in the
mosques. Everywhere they are lost.
So those who worship the moon, worship the bhakti, the so-called
love of God, are lost to Sahaja Yoga for the time being. More the intel-
lectuals are here because they really ... sound more sane than the other.
But this movement towards the right is overdone.
So now, to bring Sahaja Yogis to normalcy is to bring them to the
left side, as they are today. That is why I took you down to villages,
where people are very simple, very loving, very affectionate...
Under these circumstances, one has to think of those people who
really love God. There is bhakti. There is devotion. They do not think.
They do not worry. They are blindly following God. They know there
is God and they said, "We will meet God sometime." Whatever mis-
takes they are creating, as you have committed mistakes with your
right-sided behaviour, with the left-side also, they are committing lots
of mistakes, no doubt. But they are to be brought in. You have to meet
them and they have to meet you. They will have a good effect on you.
I know they will have. To become the moon now is not so easy
because
once you have become the sun – rather difficult – you have gone a little
Pandhari temple:
the temple in Pandharpur India,
ahead. But to become the moon, you have to develop that shraddha,
near Solapur and Pune that faith, that non-thinking faith, that love.
become the moon
develop that shraddha
that non-thinking faith
that love
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-10.txt 
 6.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Start with your heart
One may ask, “From where do you start when you sit for medita-
tion...?" It is all again technique. Only one technique I would prescribe
for you people. Every group requires a different type of a technique for
the kind of problems they face. For you, it is that you start with
your
heart and end there only.
It starts from your heart, from your Atma and ends in your Atma.
Just give up talking about it. Just start feeling your heart. Just start
feeling your heart, opening it out – not your mouth so much as your
heart.
What do we do when we love? What is the sign and symptom? I
don't know in the West if that glimpse of love is also there or not.
The domain of the spirit
In Sahaja Yoga, you do not have to sacrifice anything – neither money,
nor your sleep – which is very important – nor your comforts, nothing.
Everything you get cheap. You see this blessing. And what is promised
to you is swaraj in the real sense. It is the domain of your spirit. The
liberation of the highest type is promised, which you have achieved.
And sacrifice is zero. You can't even sacrifice
time.
your
You do not have to sacrifice anything. Nothing is to be sacrificed.
Always, you get an added advantage in this way or that way. You are
blessed every moment. Count your blessings. And then one should
start understanding that these blessings are for us to become more lov-
ing, more generous and sacrificing.
The idea that we are sacrificing is itself an ego-oriented idea. What
sacrifice? What do we have to sacrifice? I mean supposing I
do
you
say, "I am sacrificing." It is nonsense because that is My nature. I have
to jolly well do it. I can’t help it. I can't run away.
If I run away from
you, My vibrations will make Me, bloat Me like this. I won't be able
to even walk. I have to give. In the same way, you have to give Real-
ization.
I have to give
you have to give
realization
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-12.txt 
 11
101.AL
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Take responsibility
If you think, "In my house, oh, I do lots of meditation, Mother. I give
further.
exclusively. I am exclusive," you are finished. You cannot go
You may have your own conception that you are going further with it.
You are absolutely wrong. I allow you to continue with your myths.
That does not mean that it is true.
People ask Me, "How many times should we attend the program?
How many times should we meditate?" Every moment.
You have to take responsibility of Sahaja Yoga now. You have to
become responsible for it in your own way. You have to do it because
you are doing it for the greater good. The more you think of the greater
good it is doing, the better it would be for you. All these are the quali-
ties of the left side – the heart, the Atma. Atma is all the time giving.
It cannot receive. That is why it is untarnishable, it is insurmountable.
Who can surmount it? It is the king of itself. Nobody can dominate.
Nothing, no material wealth, nothing can dominate it. It is above.
So to get to a subtler life, take to a spiritual life, they say. But spiri-
tual life means what? They do not understand. And spirit in the Eng-
lish language, it is such a misnomer that for three things they use one
word “spirit." Can you imagine? For the dead, for the spirit that they
| allow
to drink and the spirit, so-called, that exists within them. It is absurd to
you
give such a name, one name to the three things, which are absolutely
continue with contradicting each other.
So, to get to a subtler life, one has to get to the spirit, to the subtle-
your myths
hs ties of everything.
Understand the subtler value
In Pune, people wanted to give you some presents. They said, "What
should we give?" I said, "Give them the soil of Maharashtra." Every
particle is vibrated here, the clay of Maharashtra.... I said give some-
thing symbolic and I chose that for you. I wanted to see your reac-
tions, what reactions you will have.
It was chosen with a purpose. It is a very important thing you are
taking with you. It is a very important thing. It is vibrated clay from
Maharashtra. It is a very great thing.... The soil is vibrated. There are
punyas there. And out of that soil, I wanted to find out something that
would be symbolic. I myself went before the puja to select it....
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-14.txt 
 That is the most important thing you are taking from here. All other things are
of utility of a very gross nature. You may try, you can put a plant in it which will
give vibrations. I was told that they were asked to send it by ship. It is very wrong.
But if I give you a silver thing, you will carry it with you. Will you send it by ship...?
To get to subtler things is to understand the subtler values of everything. It can-
not be weighed or understood through money. In the West, people buy everything
as an investment.... Everything must be standardized because it should have a resale
value. Imagine to have everything which is saleable. It means there is no feeling for
that thing. They would buy even a certificate the same way, even the bed they sleep
in, everything should be resalable. And this is the curse of that country....
If
you start understanding things that have vibrations, then you will be amazed
that the things that look so insipid, so useless, not resalable at all – you can say
worthless, you can call it from all our standards absolutely worthless – could be so
much useful. Like one hair of Mohammed-sahib – imagine one hair of Mohammed-
sahib – the shroud of Christ, but that also they are selling now. They are making
money out of that also. I mean, thanks to these Western people, everything is sale-
able.
13
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-15.txt 
 The living energy
Once you start going to the subtler side of the physical things ... they
should be the most precious things for you, which is the most pre-
people.
Which is the most precious energy for us? It is the living energy. The
cious energy for you. Our values are changed. We are different
synthesized energy of all the energies is the living energy. But we be-
lieve in money energy or destructive energies or atomic energies, elec-
trical energies, now petrol energies. And all these points will be hit to
understand that you have to do without them.
So the greatest thing for a Sahaja Yogi is the living energy and the
sign of living energy is that it grows and discards all that is useless for
it. It knows how to work it out.
In the same way, a Sahaja Yogi should know what is important,
what is unimportant. You are judged every moment, naturally, be-
cause you have entered into the judgment of God.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Love is subtle
This understanding of becoming subtler comes through love. What is
love is hard to describe. You can only enjoy it. I enjoy it when a vil-
lager brings something so simple...
The love we talk of is to be subtler. It becomes really subtler when
you really enjoy. Like giving something to someone is one of the ways
of judging it. When you start to enjoy giving – not taking, just giving
- then
you should know on the material level you have felt, you have
touched that shore of subtlety on the material level only....
The subtlety of love is that love for a person – not with any reason-
ing or with any way of gain or any relationship whatsoever – is to just
emit love. Whether you are recognized or not, to just emit love is the
subtler way of loving.
That love cures people. That love comforts. That is the comforting
side. It comforts.
To begin with, we should see to the comforts of others. Self-in-
dulgence is against that love. People would like to make My bed. All
right, they love Me I know, but it must permeate to others. They love
Me and second they love themselves. That is no good.
Between Me and them there is a big gap. All that is filled by others.
Who are the others? They are the Sahaja Yogis. We would never make
a bed of another Sahaja Yogi out of love also. It is very difficult. It is
too much. But to find out the faults with other Sahaja Yogis – “You
got up very early, you opened the tap a bit loudly, I couldn't sleep"
this is a very common complaint. “They banged the door early in the
morning, they made a noise." Because your brains are out now with
thinking, you are so much strained here that you cannot bear any
sounds anywhere. I mean people can only live in a churchyard happily,
I think, if that is the situation...
to just emit love
is the subtler
way of loving
15
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-17.txt 
 Be sweet
When we start comforting others, to give comfort to their physical
body, to their mental body, that is also a very farfetched thing because
to say comforting things, to say beautiful things to others is regarded
as I don't know what. In the West, it is very hard to find people who
can find words to say sweet things to others....
Speak sweet words. Say something sweet. Be kind and nice. It is so
nice to hear that you are sweet to each other.
When people come and tell Me that such-and-such Sahaja Yogi
"came and comforted me and was very kind," I really feel Sahaja Yoga
is working in a big way. I feel it in a very big way....
Try to mold your Vishuddhi in a proper way, otherwise you will
have Vishuddhi troubles, I must say. Try to use language which is ex-
tremely sweet. It does not mean hypocrisy
no. You are great in-
side. You want to love, but there is a barrier of your ego. When your
light of love passes through that ego, it gets falsified, it gets ruined, it
gets spoiled and then you say harsh words to others. Try to be sweet
through your Vishuddhi chakra. Once you start doing that, you will
develop your witness state very well because, first of all, you witness
yourself, which is trying to be nasty to others and enjoying that nasti-
ness.
There is a Hitler sitting in your Vishuddhi and that Hitler you start
seeing... It wants to say something very harsh because that appeals to
your ego, which we call as intelligence. You see what your misidenti-
fications are. You see. “You are very intelligent, very sharp." That is
only ego or one of the agents of ego.
So try to be sweet in your tongue. It is very easy to make fun of
people for small things here and there... But when we start making fun
of others, we also become a target of fun.
you are great inside
you want to love
you
but there is
a barrier
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-18.txt 
 You are Sahaja Yogis
Now that you have become Sahaja Yogis, you are no
more English, Indians, Americans – nothing. You are
Sahaja Yogis.
You belong to a very, very great organization of God.
And Sahaja Yoga is the place where you have to learn in
every way. Indians have to learn how to be honest and
English have to learn how to love. Americans have to
learn how to be self-respecting. All of us have to learn,
give up what we had, our identifications, and we have to
become subtler and universal and people of such values
that anybody who sees will say that in America Mother
has created Abraham Lincolns, in Russia Tolstoys, in
Maharashtra Shivajis.
I am too ambitious, I should say, but I see reality in
you and reality in Myself. On that basis, I say, one has
to create people of that special quality, who have sterling
qualities, spiritual qualities which are so subtle, so
beautiful, so sweet, so understanding and still, just like
steel, nobody can budge them from their own principles,
tattwas.
That is what it is – so simple as that. And then you
start enjoying your love, enjoying your virtues, enjoying
everything and having compassion for others.
17
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-19.txt 
 Then you do not catch. You catch because you do not have compassion. In com-
passion you will never catch – never. A mother never gets a disease from her child.
She never gets a disease from her child, it is a fact. The child may be a tuberculosis
patient or could be any patient. She never catches because she loves.
In the same way, when you really love, you will never catch anything. Then what
is the question of what is to clear, where to clear, what to do? What does it matter?
You are just flowing your heart.
At this moment, My children, My Sahaja Yogis are at that level that they can
completely open their heart without any fear. It is a very different stage you have
reached now. You are at a different stage. Just assume your powers. Know that you
are that. Just open your heart.... There should be no fear. There will be no problem.
Material problems are not difficult to be solved....
I have known of some Sahaja Yogis who have been in Sahaja Yoga six, seven
but still they are frightened about their physical body, the troubles they have
years,
had and this and that. If they can just leave that fear, they will get out of it. It is such
a vicious circle.... We are afraid that our heart will again be caught up into nonsen-
sical things, so we do not want to open our heart. That fear I can understand. But
now that you are Sahaja Yogis, it is finished. Ask all these people to get lost. All these
fears, you should ask them to get lost.
18
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-20.txt 
 You are the spirit
When you discover that you are the spirit, you are that powerful spirit.
Just try to steady how it feels happy. It is very simple.
When do you feel really happy? It is when you give something,
but not to Mataji only.... If I take something from you, you will feel
very happy about it, I know. But to somebody else, give some love and
comfort. What a great power this voice and this vani has, that you
can comfort others by saying good things. Can you imagine what a
power God has given you? Without spending a single paise, you can
comfort others only by saying good things. If you say a mantra, you
will comfort them more in a subtle way. If
you
instill the love of God
within them, it is even greater. And the joy of that is so much because
the spirit is joy. The more you open it out, the more light comes in, the
more it works out.
So give up that fear which is placed within you in your experiences.
Now this is a new experience of a new life, where your energy comes
from the spirit, which is love. In one word: it is love. And in three
words: it is truth, it is attention and it is joy. All put together, it is love.
When you mix them up, it becomes love. And that is what you have.
It is the great power of love. Through your attention you love others.
Even attention is sufficient. Be attentive.... To win over other people is
also this way – to be kind to them, to give to them. But to give them
Realization is the highest thing.
in one word
it is love
and in three words
it is truth
it is attention
and it is joy
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-21.txt 
 Sympathy and love
When you become subtler and subtler, you will see that you will not
have sympathies with people who are afflicted – not sympathies, but
will have love for them. There is a big difference between sympa-
you
thy and love. When you have sympathy, that means what? You share
pathos. If you want to share pathos, share. It is a very good idea is to
share pathos. But if you want to share joy, you will not have sympa-
thy, you will have love. You want to share your joy of your spirit with
another person, so you may talk to that person in a way
that may not
look so much pleasing and falling at his feet. You see, this is the work
of politicians or business people, not yours. You are not seeking any
business out of them. You want them to come to Realization, so you
have to say which things are wrong very firmly. With a real firm hand
you have to say, "This is absolutely wrong, absurd." You have to con-
CC
כ
vince on that point.... That is also love.
So love is the strongest thing and the sweetest thing. It is such a
beautiful combination and only the one who has the wisdom, that
subtler wisdom, can achieve it.
Now again the mind will work, “How to do it?" I think all of you
should put this
word “how" into the sea. There is another
good
very
word in the English language which you should use: “why not." That
is the way you can assure yourself, ascertain yourself, work it out that
way into a complete blessing of God.
You have to just pass those blessings to others, that's all. Nothing
accept love
more is to be done. Just pass that light to others. For that, what you
need is a man who has accepted love as his career, a man who wor-
as a career ships love, a person who thinks love is above all.
We extend our love to Him and ask Him to create love in the hearts
of people who worship Him. Those who worship Surya, must know
that Christ resides in that centre, who was nothing but love. All His
life He loved. He sacrificed Himself because He loved you so much
that He wanted you all to get into the kingdom of God. He sacrificed
Himself at the altar of God's forbidden territories. He made it possible
for you to go there by sucking your ego and superego. He is the mes-
senger of love who was born on the Surya.
So to do the greatest justice to Surya is to decide today that you
will take up love as your worshipping, as your puja.
all.
May God bless
20
you
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-22.txt 
 **..
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-23.txt 
 How can we please you best?
I have no desires. I do not know. You see, inside Me is complete peace and complete
satisfaction. There is nothing that is needed inside.
But the ripples of that joy flow outward all the time. And when it reaches your
shores, it comes back. And it weaves a beautiful pattern. And I see the pattern.
The reciprocity, how much you reciprocate, is the way the pattern is beautiful. It is
delicate. It is powerful. It is so soothing and it weaves the complete beauty of bhakti, so
much so that this ocean of joy itself gets turbulent and I really swing with it.
And it is not easy to describe that beautiful feeling of tremendous joy. The first thing
– with all My heart, with all My soul. In
you have to know is that I love you very much
the same way, try to love Me with all sincerity and trust....
I will speak for one minute about this meditation.
Yesterday I told you about putting your attention to different areas, the pradesh or
the chakras.... When you pay attention to the chakras, where you pay attention is the
point. Actually, you pay attention to the Deity.
Now this Deity, supposing you are taking the name of Shri Ram, you are trying to
establish Shri Ram within your heart, the right Heart chakra. Now at that time what do
you do? You say the mantra.
But there is another way which is easier because you are saying a mantra in a way
that is not so much intelligible there to Shri Ram. But first of all, if you study the quali-
ties of Shri Ram, what were His qualities? And if you manifest those qualities through
your character, then it is very easy to please Shri Ram.
What is the quality of Shri Ganesh? He is entirely surrendered to Mother. Even the
Father does not bother Him.
What is the quality of Christ? He forgives those who have crucified Him. He can go
through all kinds of tapas.
What is the quality of Shri Krishna, for whom everything is a leela? Like that, when
you take the name of Shri Krishna, do you see everything as a witness? If effortlessly
that happens to you, you should know that you have established Shri Krishna.
It is the most difficult thing to establish Me because I am Mahamaya and the facets
are so many – sixteen thousand into, raised to the power of one thousand.
6 May 1984 Rouen France
22
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-24.txt 
 174
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-25.txt 
 Vanity into Pride
NOT E GO
Vanity must be made into pride. You should be proud that you are Sahaja
Yogis, really proud. Raise you heads with pride that “we are Sahaja Yogis."
CC
Pride comes
Pride is never oppressive. It is a glorious thing to be proud. Actually pride is
because you
achieve
something in life.. nothing but the expression of self-esteem. Begging, borrowing, mimicry, all
It is good to have
pride. There is a these things come from the less understanding of yourself. So vanity should be
difference between
vanity and pride.
Pride means you
the pride and the pride should be the expression of self-esteem.
Self-esteem is very different from ego. One is reality, another is complete
have really achieved
something and you artificiality.... So you have to be not egotistical but proud – proud that you are
are proud of it.
And vanity means
you have achieved
nothing and you are
Sahaja Yogis, proud that you are born at such a time when you have to carry
on the duties of God's work, that God has chosen you so that you should
proud of it. come up to that level.
Some people I find suddenly become morose recluses in Sahaja Yoga. They
will never be forgiven because God has given them so much. Supposing some-
body gives you a diamond. You are proud. You put it on and show off. But
when
have been given your spirit, you should be proud and not to behave
you
like recluses. Some people feel, "I shall not do any job now. I'll not go out. I’ll
sit at home and meditate." There is no place for such people in Sahaja Yoga.
"I can't do this." The word “can't" should go away from the dictionary of
people who are supposed to be Sahaja Yogis. You just cannot say, "I can't do
it."
So the self-esteem will give you that kind of a dynamism which is needed
for Sahaja Yoga – a discreet dynamism, a wise dynamism. I won't have to
solve your problems any more.
Birthday Puja 1983
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-28.txt 
 more
You all have depth, a very deep personality within yourself – but we have to touch that.
That is very important because we sing, have music. That is very good thing. That
we enjoy each other's company also is a very good. And that is a nice thing. But we
have to enjoy our own company also by meditating and going within.
"Now, what is the use?" one may ask. "Mother, now we have got Realization,
we have a nice life, we are enjoying ourselves, we are doing so well."
The deeper you go, the deeper you touch the essences of all the things like all the
elements....
All elements have got an effect if a saint wants to have an effect. But first of all, 6 May 1987
you must reach your own essences. Once you reach your own essences, then you Sydney
reach the essences of all the elements and then you can handle all the elements as you
like or you can order them as you like. First they will act, expressing that they have
been touched... Then later on you can command and you can ask the rain to come.
To work out many things of that kind, we have to be deep people, we have to
go much deeper within ourselves to touch our essences.... While doing so, actually
we move horizontally. When we start moving horizontally, at the core of it we find
that there are these essences placed and these essences then start exciting the essences
across. Like in the radio you have seen there is ether. Now when you speak on one
side of the radio, it gets completely manifested in the essence of the ether and then
everybody can hear it. Now when you people just give a bandhan, sometimes you
find that you have communicated with another person. But that is only the essence
of the ether – we can say the subtler of the subtlest. People have only gone onto the
subtler side, we can say, by science. But you go to the subtler side and that subtler
side gives you all these effects....
All the essences are working out for you, as well as all the Deities are working
you are the
out for you. They are very anxious that these things should be done and
channels for them to work it out.
27
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-29.txt 
 Being effective
My horizontal movement is quite large and is very subtle and I do it quietly. But you
must also understand that you can do a lot by your horizontal movement. By horizontal
movement, what happens is that you start meditating on a particular subject which is a
very bothersome subject and which is for the destruction of humanity. Anything – you
just put your attention to it and meditate. If you are that deep, that means if your calibre
has improved to that extent, you will immediately put an effect on that. Immediately you
will see there will be a change, there will be something happening in that direction. This
your power which you have to actually develop.
So we have to meditate and, by meditation, we develop that strength within us, so
is
automatically we start solving the problem. Like our antenna grows up to that point.
The way we are strong inside, they grow outside to help so many things which are to be
helped.
Now you see that people are realizing that the world is in a great mess and there are
lots of problems that have come through materialism, through wrong thinking, through
emotional thinking, through stupidity we can say. We have no time for all this. What we
have to do is to develop ourselves deeper and deeper and deeper, so that on the horizon-
tal plane also we are effective.
Beyond yourself
Sahaja Yoga first of all is for personal improvement. It is for the inner improvement as
far as the personal side is concerned. That means your intelligence must improve, your
temperament must improve, your heart must clear out, your feelings must be all right.
health should be all right. Then your relationship with others should be all
Then
your
All these things are there.
right. Your ego should go away. Your superego should go away.
But this only helps a personality, just a personality that is very limited. That is yourself.
But now this personality can become an instrument, if you can develop that depth
within yourself. Normally what happens is that people are very much still worried about
themselves – say about their wives, about their children, about their husbands or their
household or this and that. These are not important things because we have to be those
instruments which are like pilotless bombs. We have to develop that depth within us.
That depth is possible and you can really cure many problems of your country if you
could just meditate on them....
It is important that you also develop those deeper feelings within you, a deeper sense
within you. But mostly people are a very superficial type. They just think about their
body, their impressions, how they carry themselves. At the most they will think we have
to be very legal-minded or we have to be at the most not drinking, not smoking and
when all these things are achieved we have achieved everything. But I think that is not so.
28
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-30.txt 
 Affecting change
The second point is that we think that if we love each other, if we love
much
Mother, that is the end of everything. It is not true also because your love
for Me is there, no doubt, and it should be intense, it should be deeper. But
the deeper you go into that love, then you will be surprised how you receive
a special quality of correcting the things that are wrong around you. Gradu-
ally that quality improves.
more
For example, if a Sahaja Yogi goes to anybody's house, that house must
become auspicious. But such a Sahaja Yogi must have a good heart. If the
heart is not good – in the heart there is still anger, passion, lust, greed – then
such a heart won't affect. But a person who has purified himself, if he goes
into any family, any household, any society, the whole change will take
place. The circumstances will change. Things that do not work out will start
working out immediately....
Wherever a saint goes, things are changing. But you have to be a saint
and a saintly person has a very deep understanding of another person and
this is what it is lacking. We do not have that deep understanding for each
other. Even if you have it for some of your own friends or maybe in the
same ashram that you are staying ... it should deepen much more. You
should go further and further.
The new course
think of Me it works out.... But first of all, the meditative process
If
you
should be increased. We all must meditate. That is very important. Meditate
sincerely – not just because we have to meditate, but because we have to be
deep, we have to grow within to express our great powers of divine love,
you all can
to correct so many things, which you can do very easily. I know
do it.
There is no need to have big degrees for that, a big education for that.
Nothing is needed. What is needed is a deep feeling of love for the whole
universe – and that changes. The all-destructive forces change their course
and it is then for the constructive forces.
But on the whole, that works out much faster if you all do that medita-
tion with sincerity, with intensity, with understanding.
May God bless you.
It is much more than our music, much more than My lectures or any-
thing that we have to do. And now the course has to change. I am sure you
people will take to the new course, so may God bless you for that.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-31.txt 
 OBJECTS
twenty{two
TO REACH TO GIVE TO OPEN
Life Eternal Trust was created by Her Holiness Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi on March
8, 1972 in Mumbai, then Bombay. It was less than two years since the opening of the
Sahasrara at Nargol on May 5, 1970. With this document, the Trust was registered
with the Charity Commissioner of Greater Bombay. It was drafted and signed by
Shri Mataji. It contains twenty-two objectives or “objects."
To facilitate the work of Mataji as follows:
(1) To expedite the process of spiritual evolution by exciting the residual con-
sciousness, i.e. Kundalini, to rise ultimately leading to self-realisation (second
birth as defined in the Bible, the Koran, the Indian Scriptures and the great
ancient prophets and sages all over the world).
(2) To achieve the evolution described in the foregoing paragraph through
the method of "Sahaja Yoga," which means effortless, easy, relaxed method
of meditation evolved by Mataji. To organize meditation centres for this
pur-
pose. This completely precludes all the external human efforts like rituals,
worships, prayers, recitations, reading, renunciation (i.e. Sanyasa), worship of
the preceptor (Guru) or any other physical expressions.
(3) By the process, to reach a Zero point where one becomes effortless and
starts feeling the play of the supreme. Ultimately to reach the stage where one
loses the Ego and one becomes one with the Creator and His creation.
(4) To open the minds of people through meetings introducing "thoughtless
awareness" which discovers the subtle which at present is lost in gross words,
books and dogmas.
30
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-32.txt 
 Life Elernal Trust
TO BUILD TO IMPROVE TO UNITE
(5) To introduce the only one internal living religion lying dead and
camouflaged under external practices and precepts of religion in all the
human beings and for this to organise tours and hold spiritual meet-
ings as per wishes of Mataji.
(6) To spread the news of the descent of the Divine Grace, with the
help of self-realised disciples of Mataji.
(7) To cure people of their physical and mental ailments by blessing
them with divine healing touch of Mataji and other disciples who have
developed their collective consciousness self-realisation.
(8) To give the taste of real joy that is within the self. To practice differ-
ent methods of meditation evolved by Mataji and to hold meditation
camps.
(9) To create a new generation of self-realised people and to render motherly
protection to all such children against evil intentions and to look after their
well-being.
(10) To build and run Ashramas of Sadhakas for their use during Sadhana
and to promote all activities expressing the new dimensions of creativity.
(11) To introduce this work in School, Colleges and other institutions and
groups and to run schools for younger people.
(12) To improve the aesthetics of behavior and beauty by holding exhi-
bitions of art, culture and music and through all activities which speak
the universal language of love and beauty by developing the inner sense
known as "Ati-Indriya," that enlightens the subtle sensitivities.
CC
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-33.txt 
 (13) To employ the energy of love to overcome hatred that is the
cause of wars, disintegration and destruction by publishing and re-
lating the spiritual experiences of Sadhakas which prove the univer-
sal laws of love.
(14) To overcome the void between the material saturation and the
unknown which is causing fear, restlessness, sleeplessness and ten-
sion leading to escapism from reality and false renunciation.
(15) To print, edit and publish journals, books and literature writ-
ten by Mataji and her disciples with her approval for conveying the
knowledge of truth so that the human beings who are the highest in
evolution, rise in their glory, dignity and freedom, as also for publi-
cising the activities of the institutions run by the Trust.
(16) To distribute to patients simple meditative and oils with Mata-
ji's vibrations and of any disciples on instructions from Mataji.
(17) To hold press conferences to give a correct picture of the activi-
ties of cosmic powers by demonstration or by discussion, as well as
of the Life Eternal institutions.
(18) To collect books under the guidance of Mataji for libraries.
(19) To build sanatoria, hospitals, nursing homes for the sick and
invalid.
(20) To counteract through mass spiritual power the destructive
forces against spiritualism such as evil spirits, the cult of hypnotism,
siddhis and the use of "religion" for the exploitation of the innocent.
כל
CC
(21) To unite all genuine seekers of truth divided by dogmas and
ignorance so that Satya Yuga (the Age of Truth) is born out of the
present Kaliyuga (the Age of Darkness) rather than complete annihi-
lation. To harness all the human resources to achieve this great task
for which mass evolution will be needed.
(22) To open, organise and run local centres of the Life Eternal Insti-
tution in various parts of India and in foreign countries, the centres
being opened on the distinct understanding that meditation is the
path of the entire human destiny, and that all barriers of states, na-
tions and races are artificial and irrelevant to Life Eternal.
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-34.txt 
 STATES, NATIONS AND RACES
ARE ARTIFICIAL AND IRRELEVANT TO
LIFE ETERNAL
THE DIVINE COOL BREEZE
volume twenty-six number six
www.divinecoolbreeze.org
PHOTOGRAPHS
COVER: Vaiturna India, 1982 or 1983 (Matthew Fogarty)
contact@divinecoolbreeze.org
editor@divinecoolbreeze.org
PAGES 2 and 3: Sydney Australia, March 1990 (Matthew Fogarty)
PAGE 5: Taronga Park Zoo, Sydney Australia, circa 1981 (Matthew Fogarty)
PAGES 6 to 18: Lonavala India, January 1982 (Matthew Fogarty)
WORDS
PAGE 21: Lonavala train station, January 1982
PAGE 1: 25 August 1983, Lausanne Switzerland
and 12 May 1980, London
PAGE 25: Italy, 2007 (Calin Chirou)
BACK COVER: 2 October 1978 London
PAGE 26: India, 1982 or 1983 (Matthew Fogarty)
"When you make a knot, always there is an
unwinding – always. You come by a staircase, you
always can go down. Is there a staircase by which
you cannot go down, but only come up? In the
same way, if you have made a knot there must be
a way of going out of the knot. So the going out of
the knot is worked out through Sahaja Yoga. That
also is done through vibrations."
BACK COVER: Jasper National Park, Canada (Anjan Upadhya)
PRINTED BY
King Printing Company Inc. Lowell Massachusetts USA
Nirmal Transformation Pvt Ltd. Pune Maharashtra India
 2013_Divine_Cool_Breeze_E_VI.pdf-page-35.txt 
 Is there a staircase
by which you cannot go down,
but only come up?
