YUVA दृष्टि Apr.-Jun.2014 Some have tremendous powers of prayers...just by praying they have saved the lives of many people. Your powers are based on love and compassion, and you have to use your powers for the benevolence of the people. (21-06-1992)

 TTOBURY

 hen you are listening to My tapes, note down the points what Mother has said, and see for yourself. So the education in Sahaja Yoga is very important, otherwise your intelligence will rust out. (HH Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Melbourne, 17 March 1985) Inside This Issue Sahaj Culture ...4 सृजनशक्ति सरस्वती का आशीवाद है ...१८

 In the Sahaj culture So, in the Sahaj culture, you see, we take it in a very balanced way. I find, on the whole, Chinese are the same culture as Indians have about. So, you see, is easier for Chinese to take to Sahaj culture. And the attitude – Sahaj attitude – of witnessing everything, keeping in the center. I feel yesterday, that people have very bad livers or diabetes here. Because they think too much, very money-orientated. So, first of all, when they come you should try to give them Realization, move their left up and right down, like that – from the backside. That will really help them, but also the liver treatment of ice. Also you can put ice on the left-hand side of the head, and on the backside for the eyes. For your eyes also if you put the ice on the back. it 21 April 1994 This glasses you may not need at all, may not need at all. Because you eat fish too much, in India also Bengalis are the same, they eat too much fish. So, they were very short and they were wearing glasses – that's they are. Same style: great artists, very good at delicate work, music very delicate, everything – the same way as the Chinese. And so many of you look like Bengalis: high cheek bones, small eyes, exactly the same. If the Bengalis come here you won't be able 4

 Sahaj culture

 to recognize them. (Shri Mataji laughing) Now, you see, they have improved also – the Sahaja Yogis. Their eye-sight has improved. So, what you have to do is to take out the heat from the body. You can take out from the liver, you can take out from the pancreas, from the brain and from the back-side [optic chiasma ?]. So, you can take out from everywhere – putting the right hand towards the photograph. If you can get an ice; do you get here ice? - Ice - hot water bottle – they have an ice-bottle also. Yogi : They can also buy ready-made ice in plastic. Shri Mataji : That's good. So that, you see, once your health improves, your eyes improve, everything, then others will also see it. You see, it's a proof of Sahaja Yoga. Also there is pollution problem. – Pollution. So, with pollution it is affecting lungs. But with this treatment of cooling down your system, even the lungs will improve because there is a right-heart will be affected. As I told you, we have three medicines in Ayurveda which cools you down. So, when you are coming there we'll get you those, how many people need it she will tell us. These three medicines should be taken for a month, of August. I mean, it should be a very – you can call it a liver-diet month, liver-treatment month-August. I don't know if he'll send them to you from India, if you have any problems with customs or anything. Yogi :No, no, Shri Mataji. No. Shri Mataji : Medicines – so, we can send it in your place, somehow ... We'll ask somebody to send it because I won't be there, but we can. So, in the month of August you plan up -all of you- treat your liver, that's the best. Even, I mean, I must say, despite the heat and all those things your livers are better than the Western people. (Shri Mataji laughing) Western people have really horrible livers, no doubt. (Shri Mataji laughing) So, once you feel better with your livers, you can do much better with others also, because they all had yesterday liver very hot. So hot it was, I was perspiring all over. But for liver-people they should never use the candle. No sunlight. They can sit in the moon-light, but not sun-light; and should look after their Agnya by forgiving. 6- [Hindi aside] Now our whole thing is, how you people are – they will see. For them I am something beyond. So, that's always so. So, one should not also frighten them, like he was telling Me he just said that, in Sahaja Yoga nobody is a sinner – they are half run-away. (Shri Mataji laughing) They wanted to be sinners, you see. (Shri Mataji laughing + laughter) But best is to make them sit before, you can take the tape and play it, translate it – slowly, slowly. So that they settle down with a tape. Then ask them to meditate. And then ask them if they are getting Cool Breeze or not. Just ask them. And then raise their Kundalini. Don't touch them. Raise their Kundalini. But don't tell them that you have to do this or that. Just it will clear out. 6.

 Now, supposing that their Left Vishuddhi is catching, then you just ask him, "Do you feel guilty all the time?" You should not. But for Christians, if you tell them, "You are not sinners," then they are finished. Because now the Church always says so. Now, they say a lot of things. (Shri Mataji laughing) Aside : Now you'll be able to translate it. Shri Mataji : And it's a very important work now. You see, only by this you can transform people. I felt yesterday they were all sitting there with big stress and strain on their heads. I felt that. So, don't say anything, that would disturb them, but sooth them – it's the best, soothing down. Now, they see us like this, they are being convinced that they are sinners now. So, they just can't get it into their heads that, "We are not sinners." You see, "how can that be, how Mother is saying we are not sinners?" You will notice I seldom use this word 'sin'. Because it has happened like that, that they think they are sinners, there is no redemption – so, what's the use of becoming good? "In any way, we are a sinners." (Shri Mataji laughing) And also you should not laugh at their stupidity; sometimes they can be very stupid. So, way they asked him questions was, "How to do meditation?" I said, “You don't have to do it; you have to be in it." So, the Mantra is for that is, "Mother, You are thoughtless awareness." That will remove their thoughts and they will be peaceful. And they will meditate better. Because so far, you know, with these religions all over ... and their conflicting effects. They are so conditioned and also confused. They were telling Me about Shinto-religion, where they worshipped their, their – what?- ancestors. the 99 Yesterday, a boy came and he told Me very interesting thing, that he is possessed by bhoots, by spirits. And there are two other boys, or other people – one girl and one boy– who are possessed. And they, the bhoots, they moved things from here to there, there to there. And they are talking to them in their ears. These are the devils which Christ took out, you see, sort of thing. But this fellow's thing was very interesting because he said, "We wanted to commit suicide. And we could not," he said, "I could not get cool because I did not forgive those bhoots, those devils. And they talk to us, and they tell us, 'We are Gods."" I'm sure these are the ancestors, which are following them. 199 Otherwise, why should they go once, once [ inaudible ] And why should these children be caught up? So, that shows that these ancestors are catching. They are interested in these children. They were very young, twenty years of age, imagine. And they were just shaking before Me like this. Then we took out the bhoots – and I asked him [ to put to My hand that side, ] right hand, left hand towards Me. With a candle – they run away. He said, "They are gone now, they are no more there." So, I asked him to cover himself up with something else; and then go, so they won't recognize him. They are stupid fools, you know, these spirits also. I mean, these spirits (Shri Mataji laughing)- such stupid fools. I've done this with many and I have seen that it works. And the Kumkum on the head. That also the bhoots run away. So I have told him, that you take the Kumkum vibrated and put it on the gates of this cemeteries. The bhoots won't come out. (Shri Mataji laughing) That would be a nice idea. 99

 Buddha always had a light And I don't know the Bhuddists because Buddha always had a light. He always had Kumkum. And Sahaja Yogis went to this – caves we have near Bombay, [called ] Elephanta. And there is a very big statue of Shiva. And when they entered in they said, "We were surprised, that there was light here." As you know we have had lots of miraculous photographs. Of course, one was there when in Ganapatipule this Madonna was standing before Me like a light. Also there is, My face is not there, there's only the sun. That is the sign was given to Jews and Kalaki – described like that. Kalaki has no face. And Jews also, they knew the one who is going to redeem them. 99 But you see, those people who are dull, who have no purpose in life, who do not seek, such stupid people –even can doubt everything. (Shri Mataji laughing) They cannot believe that some miracle can take place. But now I want to show you one photograph that was recently taken in Brisbane, where appeared a rainbow. And I was there, and somebody took the photograph, and very surprisingly, there is the photo – there is the painting upwards to Me. [Hindi]Kalki. [Hindi] Is amazingly in some painting -I don't know, may be of Michelangelo, or anything – of the mother and the child is in the sky. Very clearly. Now, this Paramchaitanya is doing all kinds of things – I don't know what to say. (Shri Mataji laughing) Unbelievable this one. Leave it to them. But the non-believer cannot grasp it. You see, it's a kind of a growth and entirety of a person, which can achieve it. Who is a seeker. It has to be that growth, otherwise it cannot ... Shri Mataji aside : Show them also! Show around. Show everyone. Shri Mataji : You also see? It is sometimes conditioning, it's sometimes ego – but it is going too far because there are so many, so many miraculous photographs. There is one in which Ganesha is standing behind Me, with His big, big eyes. One is on My body – it is absolutely Ganesha. Only you can see the Sari down. So, these are living Deities, they are not just imaginary. And also the Shinto-Religion they have those Gods, they are all the same. But I don't know what they have made of them... [I don't know, something.] Now, for the Buddhist you should ask them to ask one question – it was future Buddha, is described as 'Matreya'. So 'Matreya' is three Mothers together: Ma-Treya. So you just ask the question, "Mother, are You Matreya?" That's all. It answers, it's – your body starts acting like a computer. Just answers all the questions, even ifyou are not a Realized soul. The sensitivity, I don't know, is much more among Russians because they are not so materialistic, perhaps. They are so sensitive! Doctors, lawyers, professionals – above all, the scientists. 250 scientists are there in Moscow, and 300 doctors, what do you say to that? And they don't want to here anything about medical science, "Tell us about parasympathetic all the time. Tell us about the Divine." 8

 Aside : You can do it [ inaudible]. Shri Mataji : When – once Gregoire was in Austria, I think, there the doctors told him, he had pain in the thing, that they have to remove the whole thing from here to here. (Shri Mataji laughing) That's it. He said, "Mother, what should I do?" I was in America, luckily. He said, "Now they are going to take out my whole gums and everything from here. Then I am going to loose the whole of it." About what sort of doctor it was given. He showed it to many, but all of them said the same. So he said, "What to do, I have no leave also." So he said, "Gregoire, now you have to tell some lies. Of course, it is not a lie also, that you should say that my friend has telephoned to me, that there is an expert doctor in America, and I want to have leave to go to America, let me try that." They had to say yes. So he took leave and came to America to the expert doctor. And got cured in fifteen, twenty minutes. Otherwise they were going to remove him his gums. Imagine, Gregoire without 99 gums. Recently, I was in Brisbane again and somebody told Me that one Sahaja Yogini has been admitted in the hospital and the doctor was saying that she'll die within one hours time because she has meningitis. I know [Aradhna ?]. I said, “All right, she's not going to die at all." After one hour she was perfectly all right. She went out of it. 99 66 But you must have a quality of faith. Seeing everything, even if you do not have the quality of faith it doesn't work in you. That's only, I think as William Blake has said that, "These are a special category of people. A special category of people, men of God. They will become Divine and they'll make others Divine." Hundred years back He said it, hundred years back. Because it's a special category of people. 99 With all these things also you must know that people are very conditioned. So gradually, once they'll grow in Sahaja Yoga this quality of faith will become all right, because everything is tangible. So telling all these things can be just a fairy-tale – and they may not accept you; but if you raise their Kundalini, if you give them Realization and if they become one with this All- pervading power then, you see, the quality of faith improves. And that quality of people only can be saved. Others – Divine does not have any interest. So we should also not worry about such people. cannot feel the vibrations Translator : Mr. Yang has a question. Shri Mataji : Yes, yes, please! Mr. Yang : [Says something in Chinese language - all laugh.] Translator : He said he has been searching for a long time but he couldn't feel the Cool Breeze. Yogi : He cannot feel the vibrations. He cannot feel... 9.

 Shri Mataji : He is not feeling? Yogi :Only a little. Shri Mataji : (You can be in India) Yogi : But also he didn't ... Do you meditate at home? Do you meditate? Do you meditate at home? Shri Mataji : Yes, meditation is it- otherwise you (do not improve.) Yogi : Do it at home in the morning, everyday two times. (To Shri Mataji:) He said, at home he does meditate. Shri Mataji : Eh? Yogi :At home he meditates, he says, but he doesn't come to the meetings. Shri Mataji : Oh, that happened! As I told you, if a nail is cut out of the body it doesn't grow. You must come to the collectivity, it's very important. Did you go to some Guru or somebody? Yogi : He was in TM. Shri Mataji: That's it. You can see. For TM is more necessary, because to get out of TM is not easy. Horrible, TM is the worst, I think. That's why I said why he is catching in the left. Left Swadisthana is – Translator : He asked, what shall he do? (Laughter) What should he do? What to do? Shri Mataji : With a TM? Yogi : He wants, what he can do now? Treatment or meditation, what does he do. Shri Mataji : He has a left Swadisthana, so he has to use the candle, no doubt. And the TM is to be really sort of beaten up with shoes, I think something. It's horrible. Yogi : And he is keeping still in contact. Last year he was going to America to meditate with TMs still. Shri Mataji : They are very ... they grip you like that. You see the people who have been to TM have lost their houses. Their children are removed from schools, they are just on the streets. And they were jumping, you see – on the mattresses and they broke their bottoms. And they demanded, you see, they demanded money for that and these people got the money. Their bottoms were broken. There was one fellow who was running their flying academy, Peter (Pears.) Shri Mataji to the audience: Sit down all, sit down. Shri Mataji : Why do they want to go around at about three feet-level? (Shri Mataji laughing) All right, that failed. So now, new marketing has started: Ayurveda. (Poor catches) talking about that. And also there is one (Prabir Chopra) who is going down mesmerising people. Horrible. Very troublesome. Yogi : Shri Mataji, there's also this (GuruMaya) with Sitar-courses. 10

 Shri Mataji : She came here? Yogi : Yes, Shri Mataji. All of the TM people who came to Sahaja Yoga went then to this Guru-Maya afterwards. Shri Mataji : Aach! And now they will be caught, very badly, they will suffer a lot. Because, you see, she is the devil absolutely – she sells vibrated shawls. Her father – she is an illegitimate child of (Muktanand), she and her brother. And her father had diamonds one-six-hundred crores. Crore is hundred thousand, hundred hundred thousand- of pounds. Aside : It is going very hot soon. Shri Mataji : You can feel the Cool Breeze? You just come closer. Like a fan. There is a failure ...more on the right, less on the left ... left is catching, really, left is a problem. Put your left like this, and right on the Mother Earth... (sounds like: Put it close (inaudible) Very sole.) Yogi : Shri Mataji, they also have a thing, they go to sauna everyday. Shri Mataji : He? Yogi : They are going to the sauna every day. Sauna– hot, hot, hot steam. Another Yogi : Sometimes, not every day. Shri Mataji : Sauna, Sauna is [ inaudible ] (Laughter) Sauna bath is all right. For him heat is good. Sunlight is good. But now TM has to go away. Are you feeling the cool? Yogi : Yes, Shri Mataji. Shri Mataji : Are you feeling fan-like thing? All right. Yogi : (inaudible) Shri Mataji : Worst! They are going round from one to another, to another, to another – I mean marketing is sometime. We have a Rajiv Kumar in the government, he is a very high official, and he said that the secretary of one of the departments put all these into TM, and they are all suffering. Translator : He asked, from now on, what he should do? Yogi : He asked from now on, what he should do. Shri Mataji : I am just telling him that he should take the left-side treatment and beat TM with shoes. Yogi : Shoe-beating, shoe-beating. And don't go to the (inaudible). Shri Mataji : And if he has any books or anything - you should throw them away. Ah, better now. Better? Is this the sari you have to give Me? Yogi : This is the Puja sari for Thee because of... Shri Mataji : Puja. That you have to give Me in Guru Puja. Yogi : Guru Puja. 11

 (several Yogis are talking, and also Shri Mataji: inaudible) Yogi : We wanted to ask this. Shri Mataji : (inaudible) It's all right, get it laid, get it. She can, all right. Give it to Me at Guru-Puja. It's a very nice sari, they could all see it. Feel a Tension inside... Yogini : Mother, I feel the CoolBreeze, but I always feel a tension inside and. Shri Mataji : She feels the Cool Breeze? Yogi : Mother, she feels tension, she feels the tension inside. Shri Mataji : Tension. See, Ekadesha, you have a problem. Yogini : Inside of the Nabhi. Shri Mataji: You see, it is your liver again. Yogini : Liver? Shri Mataji : Very bad. It is on Ekadesha, is showing here, it's serious. So, left to the right have to put it like that, to take out the tension. You don't feel Cool Breeze in the head, do you? you See? But still it's the liver. Yogini : Mother, may I have a name? Shri Mataji : What is your name? Yogini : My name is Elisabeth. Shri Mataji : Elisabeth. One name of the Goddess is Priyamvadha. Priyamvadha, but you can call her Priya. Priya. Priya is the [girl ?], but Priyamvadha means the Goddess. Her Quality is to speak something that pleases you, which is learnable. Priyamvadha. And the short form is Priya. Yogini : Shri Mataji, I also would like to get a name. Shri Mataji : Yes, say it! Yogi: Gerlinde, she also said–it is Gerlinde Ringhofer, she also liked to have a name. Shri Mataji : She is ...? Yogi : Her name is Gerlinde Ringhofer, and she wants also a name. Shri Mataji: Gerlinde? Yogi : Gerlinde. Shri Mataji : Gerlinde? 12

 Yogi: Gerlinde – "ger" means a spear .. 66 Shri Mataji : Ahh! (Shri Mataji laughing) Lakshmi, Lakshmi is all right. Is easier. All right. So, now we have to go also. It's time. Young Yogini :Mother, may I have a name? Shri Mataji :Yes, you say. Yogi : He wants a name. Young Yogini : May I have a name? Yogi : He wants a name. Shri Mataji : Name? Yogi : Both of them want a name, I think ... (Laughter) Both of them want a name, Shri Mataji. The girl wants a name, and she wants also a name. Shri Mataji : See, I– these days I don't give names, but I will now – this time – but it ... Now, a better name. The name of'Kamala', means the Lakshmi again, Kamala. Yogi : For the girl? Shri Mataji : Meenakshi. (Laughter) Yours is Meenakshi then. Yogini : But (my friend) is also called like this, Kamala Minakshi (inaudible). (Laughter) Yogini : Meenakshi! Translator : Mother, she felt a Cool Breeze on top of her head, but she has a problem in the Nabhi. Shri Mataji:You went to some Guru, or somebody? Yogini : Before I met You. Rajneesh. Yogis : Ah, Rajneesh. Rajneesh. Yogini :Ah! But I gave up, (inaudible). Shri Mataji : Put your right hand on here, and put your left hand towards Me, and you have to say: "Mother, You are my master". Or: “I am my own master." It's better. "I am my own Master", again. 99 Yogini :I am my own master. Shri Mataji :Again. Yogini :I am my own master. Shri Mataji : Again. Yogini :I ammy own master. Shri Mataji : Again. Yogini :I am my own master. 13

 Shri Mataji : Again. Don't cry. Yogini (weeping) :I am my own master. Shri Mataji :A master cannot cry. All right, say: "I am my own master." Yogini:I am my own master. Shri Mataji : Again. Yogini :I am my own master. Shri Mataji : Again. Yogini :I am my own master. Shri Mataji : Correct- again. Yogini :I am my own master. Shri Mataji :Again. Yogini:I am my own master. Shri Mataji : Better now? Yogini : Yeah! Shri Mataji : You know, there is nothing to feel bad – because you are a seeker. As a seeker you always get lost, but if you come back it's all right. Once you have come back you are there– ll right? Better now? You get it-Cool Breeze, in the left hand? All right, this is your mantra. Translator :Your mantra: 'I am my own master." Heart Catch Translator : He has a question. Shri Mataji : What? Translator : Why he has a heart catch? Shri Mataji : Yeah? Very right-sided. Yogis : You are right-sided. Shri Mataji : Yes, you see the heart catches from the right side. Put your right hand on your heart, then come forward. May God bless you! You just have to say, "Mother, come in my heart." Twelve times, "Please come in my heart." Yogi (six times) : Mother, please come into my heart. Shri Mataji : Again. Again please say it. 14

 Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart. Shri Mataji : Again. Yogi: Mother, please come into my heart. Shri Mataji : Again. Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart. Shri Mataji : Again. Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart. Shri Mataji : Again. Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart. Shri Mataji : Again. Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart. Shri Mataji : That's it. You are all right now? (Yogi sneezes. Shri Mataji laughing.) Whenever you say, I am available. You say, "come into my head!", I will be there. You say, "Come in my stomach!" I will be there. Anywhere you say-I am there. 66 Translator : Now he says, when he is meditating, the vibration is easy and Cool Breeze is easy-but during the day... Shri Mataji : Yeah, yeah. Translator : ... it is very difficult. Shri Mataji : Then you should just close your eyes and think of Me. That's the only thing I can say. Translator : He says, "It is very easy to catch." Shri Mataji : Eh? Translator: Very easy to catch, sometimes. Shri Mataji : Then before going out you should take a Bandhan. And also meditate, and before sleeping also take a Bandhan. Put your attention to Sahasrara before sleeping, it's better. Gradually, you see, it purifies you completely. You have to have patience, that's all. Yogi : He tries to cure people. Shri Mataji : Ah? Yogi : He is trying to cure people. He is trying to cure other people. Shri Mataji : Aya ... he should take Bandhan and he can do it, but don't touch them. Best is to give them photographs. That's all. Them also a Bandhan. Yourself, and to them also. Yes, and - you can give photographs, it's the best. And tell them to meditate. Don't touch them, because they are quite complicated to begin with. (Shri Mataji gets a present.) 15

 Shri Mataji : What's it? Oh, you have done it! (Laughter and applause) O My God, it's done so beautifully. Yogi :Looks nice. (Laughter) Shri Mataji : I am not so beautiful like this. (Laughter) Very sweet. Thank you very much! You should write your name here. They are artists, I must say. Such a little girl. Better now! Are you better? Is he better now! Are you better now? Yogi : Much better. Shri Mataji : Are you better now? Better. Now sit with a – never sit with a locked gate, with an Asanas. With a Sahaja Asana, like him. Sahaja Asana. Sahaja Asana, like this: Sahaja Asana. (Many are talking, also Shri Mataji: inaudible) Shri Mataji :Not to lock up. Now it's better, now. Translator : Mr Yang says his left hand is cool. Shri Mataji : Right hand on the Mother Earth. Translator : Right hand put on the Mother Earth. Shri Mataji : If it is a right-hand-problem, then put the right hand towards the photograph and left hand upwards. It's very simple – Sahaja Yoga. No, no, no, no. Left hand towards the photograph, in your case. Photograph. Towards Me, now. And the right hand on the Mother Earth. Because left side goes in the Mother Earth; and right side goes into the ether. For the colour change of the skin Yogini (silently): Mother, Mother, Mother– You mentioned this birthmark can be cured by Sahaja Yoga treatment. (Laughter) Yogi : She is a very little, very little kind of a nevus, very little for the colour change of the skin, and she is worried about the daughter about that. Shri Mataji : What is less? Yogi : Come, come on. Yogis : Birthmark. Oh God! Birthmark. [inaudible ] She is worried about the birthmark ... (inaudible). Yogis : ... Shri Mataji : Let's see that go away. You tried something for that? Nevus. Yogi : Because I told her, she shouldn't worry about it, because she is a beautiful girl. She shouldn't worry about that. 16

 Shri Mataji : Ha ha! She does. But Haldi is very good for her. You get in India something like Turmeric. Yogi : We have here Haldi, Shri Mataji. We have... Shri Mataji : That cools Me also. (They doubt), they get in England, (they doubt). These are all (itching) things, but let's try. Yogi : Like in the marriage ceremony you put it, you make it wet and put it in? Shri Mataji : It's – get a tube. Some are going to send Me these medicines, on the Diwali. I asked somebody to send it from Pune. Yogi : Shri Mataji, can you repeat the names please first? Shri Mataji : All right, write it down! The first one is Chandanas. This you have to take one spoon after breakfast. One table-spoon, or maybe small spoon. To begin with, let's start with one, yes? Then one table-spoon. Then you have to take another one which is called as Oudumber, Oudumber. O-u-d-u-m-b-e-r, Oudumber-water. That you should take after lunch and after dinner. The best start, it is the easiest to send a Sabchasi, s-a-b-ch-ai, Sabchasi. They are very cheap. Now, you soak sabchasis in the water – before sleeping. And early in the morning, just after brushing your This is also one tea-spoon full, you have to soak. Brushing the teeth you take that water. So much of water we do. Drink the water and also eat the sabchasis. Which get teeth. swollen up. This is for liver. Also some people have vomiting sensation and all that, in that case. Or migraines. This, you can take it in winter: is ginger, which is mixed with lemon and salt. You could eat ginger, raw ginger. Yogi : As a powder, or fresh ginger? Shri Mataji : No, no, no, not powder. Ginger. Raw ginger. Yogi : Raw. Shri Mataji: With food or something. Yogi : Yes, they cook a lot with ginger, the Chinese. Shri Mataji : Yeah. But also powder of ginger – you can take early in the morning before anyone else, with sugar. For example you press a spoon. I will show you: a little bit should be taken first of all the powder. And should be covered with vibrated sugar. 17

 का] भ सृजनशक्ति सरस्वती का आशीर्वाद है

 कला की ओर दृष्टि बढ़ाने से जीवन में सौन्दर्य आ जाता है... यह सृजनशक्ति सरस्वती का आशीर्वाद है जिसके द्वारा अनेक कलायें अत्पन्न हुई ...कला की ओर दृष्टि बढ़ाने से एक तो जीवन में सौन्दर्य आ जाता है और जीवन का रहन- सहन सुन्दर हो जाता है ...हमारे ऊबड़ खाबड़ जीवन में यदि थोड़ी सी कला की झलक आ जाए तो बड़ा सुख और आनंद मिलता है । अगर आप कला को बगैर आत्मसाक्षात्कार के ही अपनाना चाहें तो वह कला अधूरी रह जाती है ... अगर आत्मसाक्षात्कारी मनुष्य ...कोई कलात्मक चीज़ बनाता है तो उसमें से भी चैतन्य आने लग जाता है। सुन्दर होने के साथ साथ ऐसी कृति में एक तरह की अनन्तशक्ति होती है ... क्योंकि उसने जो कुछ भी बनाया है आत्मा की अनुभूति से बनाया है।...हाथ से बनी हुई चीजों में चैतन्य बहता है ... हाथ से बनी चीजों के द्वारा अपने हृदय का आनंद हम दूसरों को समर्पित करते हैं ।..कलात्मक चीजू हठात आपको निर्विचारिता में उतारेगी ....क्योंकि सौन्दर्य देखने से ही चैतन्य एक दम बहने लगता है। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 4-4-92, यमुना नगर, खंड IV, अंक 3-4, 1992 कला का जो भी कार्य हम करते हैं वह परमात्मा को समर्पित होना चाहिए। इस भाव से की गई सभी रचनायें शाश्वत होंगी। परमात्मा को समर्पित सभी कवितायें, संगीत और कलाकृतियाँ आज भी जीवित हैं... कला परमात्मा की ज्योति है... इनमें चैतन्य लहरियाँ है। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 3-2-92, कलकत्ता, खंड IV, अंक V, VI, 1992 भारतीय काव्य कला भारतीय काव्यकला के अन्तर्गत सारे वैदिक ग्रंथों का असीम भंडार है जिसकी भाषा संस्कृत है । वैदिक ग्रंथों के साथ कालिदास , माघ, भारवि, भवभूति, दंडी तथा बाणभट्ट जैसे साहित्य साधकों की पद्य व गद्य में लिखित कृतियाँ तथा पालि, प्राकृत व अपभ्रंशभाषा में रचा गया सारा बौद्ध और जैन साहित्य भारतीय काव्य कला के प्रमुख अंश है । भारत की बंगला मराठी आदि प्रादेशिक भाषाओं और अवधी, ब्रजभाषा व भोजपुरी जैसी बोलियों में भी अनेक प्रसिद्ध ग्रंथ लिखे गए हैं । साहित्य क्या है? इसे स + हित कहते हैं अर्थात हितकारी। यदि वह हितकारी नहीं है तो साहित्य नहीं व्यर्थ है। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 23-2-92, न्यूजीलैंड, खंड IV, अंक 7-8, 1992 शारदा देवी की कृपा से (अपने देश में) बहुतों ने बहुत कुछ लिखा। ज्ञानेश्वर जी ने ' ज्ञानेश्वरी' लिखी और उसके बाद एक और किताब (अमृतानुभव) इतनी सुन्दर है कि ऐसा लगता है कि आप अमृत पी रहे हों। संतों ने लिखा जिन पर शारदा देवी की कृपा हुई। शरदचन्द्र गुर आप पढ़िए तो आप कहानी लिखना शुरु कर 19 |

 देंगे। ऐसे ऐसे लेखक अपने यहाँ हो गए इस भारतवर्ष में कि ऐसे कहीं नहीं हुए होंगे। .. राजस्थान में उसकी ( देवी सरस्वती की ) बड़ी कृपा रही । यहाँ बड़े-बड़े कवि हो गए और यहाँ से अलेक्ज़ेन्डर (सिकन्दर) भी यहाँ की संस्कृति देखकर इतने अचंभे में पड़ गए तो वापस गए और अपने साथ चंद्रवर्दाई को ले गए। एक बड़े भारी कवि है चंद्रवर्दाई यहीं के हैं , राजस्थान के हैं... फिर सूफियों में खसरो हैं। क्या कवितायें हैं | कबीरदास हैं। गुरु नानक साहब का तो कहना ही क्या वो तो गुरु हैं। रामदास स्वामी (हैं)बंगाल में भी क्या एक से एक कवि हो गए और ये सब शारदा देवी की कृपा से। सारे शब्दों से मानोधर्म बहता हो। प्रकाश और सारे ही शब्द इनके व्यवस्थित ऐसा लगता है मानो निर्विचारिता में लिखे गए हों। इतने शुद्ध वर्णन ये हम ज़रूर कहेंगे कि सबसे ज्यादा संस्कृत में और उसके बाद मराठी में ही अध्यात्म पे किताबें बढ़िया लिखी। न जाने बड़ी गहराई से अध्यात्म पे काम किया गया ... अब यही सोचिए अंग्रेजी भाषा में आत्मा के लिए Spirit शब्द है, है ना? शराब को भी Spirit और भूत को भी ये कोई भाषा हुई?... फ्रेंच भाषा तो उससे भी गई बीती, एकदम, उसमें चेतना के लिए कोई शब्द नहीं।. उनके (शारदा) आशीर्वाद से ही जितने महान ग्रंथ हैं वो बने । कितने महान नाटक या कादम्बरियाँ लिखी गई वो सब शारदा देवी के आशीर्वाद से .. श्रीमाताजी, 11-12-94, जयपुर प.पू. प.पू.श्रीमाताजी ने बताया है " ओम" से बना है... हम जानते नहीं हमारा संगीत कितना भारत का जो संगीत है। ऊँचा है, इस संगीत में सारा ओम है। यह आत्मा का संगीत है, इससे हमारे हाथ के वायब्रेशन बढते हैं और इससे परम .. ... शान्ति मिलती है। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 16-3-84, दिल्ली मैं आपको 'राग' के विषय में बताऊँगी- 'रा' का अर्थ है शक्ति और 'ग' शब्द का भारत का जो है। अर्थ है जो हमारे अन्दर प्रवेश कर जाए, यह आकाश तत्त्व का गुण आकाश तत्त्व में यदि संगीत है " ओम'" आप कोई शब्द डाल दें तो आप ब्रह्माण्ड के किसी भी कोने में पकड़ सकते हैं तो राग वह से बना है... हम शक्ति है जो आकाश तत्त्व में प्रवेश कर जाती है, अर्थात आपकी आत्मा ही राग है। जानते नहीं हमारा प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 14-8-88, जार्ज श्वेस संगीत कितना ऊँचा है, इस संस्कृत भाषा की विशेषता ये है कि एक-एक अक्षर मंत्र है। संगीत में सारा जब तक आप संस्कृत में श्लोक नहीं कहते, मेरे चक्र चलते ही नहीं, आश्चर्य की ओम है। ... ... बात है। 20

 ा ा ॐ YAMAHA मंत्र विद्या का बड़ा भारी शास्त्र है। ...हमारे प्राचीन ग्रंन्थों में नाना प्रकार के वाद्ययंत्रों का उल्लेख मिलता है। इन्हें चार भागों में विभक्त किया गया है' ... ... प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 3-2-78, दिल्ली हमारे देश का जो संगीत है और नृत्य है, ऐसा कहीं भी दुनियाँ में तंत्रीगत वाद्ययंत्र का 1. तंत्रीगत नहीं है कहीं भी... ये सब आपके भारत की संस्कृति है... संगीत देहात में साधारण नाम वीणा है। "संगीत दमोदर ग्रन्थ" में वीणा के उन्तीस प्रकार-भेद और गाते हैं, लोग कितना शुद्ध, कितने प्रेम से और शारदा देवी के पूर्ण आशीर्वाद से । उनका विस्तृत वर्णन दिया है- जैसे ब्रह्मवीणा, किन्नरी, सांरंगी, पिनाकी, त्रिदायी, घोषवली आदि आदि। श्री नारद की वीणा चर्चित रही है, देवी सरस्वती का नाम ही वीणा वादिनी है। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 11-12-94, जयपुर प.पू.श्रीमाताजी ने राजस्थान की कला की बहुत सराहना की है- इस राजस्थान में जो कला का प्रादुर्भाव हुआ है ...ये बिलकुल शारदा देवी का ही आशीर्वाद है इसमें कोई शक नहीं। ऐसी ऐसी नक्काशियाँ, ऐसी ऐसी चीज़े बनाने लग गए लोग हाथ से अपने, ... ... 2. चर्मवाद्य यंत्र यानी चर्म से आच्छादित वाद्य जैसे- मुरज, झल्ली, ढपली, बड़ा डमरू, दुन्दभी, मृदंग, स्तुंग आदि। आश्चर्य।... अब सारे पाटरी (pottery) में देख लीजिए कहीं देख लीजिए। 3. रन्ध्रयुक्त वाद्य- जो खोखली लकडी से बनाए जाते है, इनसे छिद्र होते हैं जैसे वंशी, मुरली, तोरही, मृंग, स्वरनाभि आदि। क्या सुन्दर सुन्दर कला, बढ़िया ऐसे रंग-बिरंगी ऐसी चीज़ें... रंगों की हमारे यहाँ जो साड़ियाँ बनती हैं, कपड़े बनते हैं, लहँगे बनते हैं वे सब उनके ( पार्चात्य) देश में कहाँ? बहुत ही कलापूर्ण यहाँ (राजस्थान ) के लोग हैं, बहुत सुंदर इतने सुन्दर घर आपको मेरे ख्याल से हिन्दुस्तान में कहीं 4. धातुनिर्मित वाद्य- जैसे करताल, जयघंटा, झंझताल, मंजीरा घंटी, घुंघरू आदि । नहीं मिलेंगे... अपने देश मे जो कुछ कलाकारों ने बनाया उसकी इज्ज़त 21 |

 करनी चाहिए... अजंता जैसी चीज कोई नहीं बना सकता... सो कला में रुचि रखना और अपने देश की कला को पहले अपनाना चाहिए। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 11-12-94, जयपुर हमारा संगीत हमारी कलायें हमारा जो कुछ भी है बड़ा गहन है उसको समझिए क्या चीज है। उसकी गहनता में घुसें। मैं चाहूँगी आपसे जितना भी बन पड़े हमारे संगीत के बारे में, कला के बारे में जानने का प्रयत्न करें। जो अपनी कला को नहीं जानते अपनी भारत माँ को नहीं जानते, वे इस माता को प्यार कैसे कर सकते हैं? प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 25-3-85, दिल्ली, निर्मला योग जु.अग.2008 हमारे अस्त्र-शस्त्र प्राचीन भारत के आर्य पुरुष अस्त्र - शस्त्र विद्या में निपुण थे, उन्होंने आतताइयों एवं दुष्टों के दमन के लिए नाना प्रकार के अस्त्र शस्त्रों की सृष्टि की थी । हमारे यहाँ दिव्य अस्त्र थे जो मंत्रों से चलाये जाते थे, प्रत्येक शस्त्र पर भिन्न-भिन्न देव शक्ति का अधिकार होता था जैसे- आग्नेय, पर्जन्य, गरुड़, ब्रह्मास्त्र, पाशुपत आदि। गदा, मुग्दर, चक्र, वज्र, शूल, खड्ग, फरसा, धनुष-वाण, बछी, कुल्हाड़ी आदि अनेक अस्त्र-शस्त्र का उल्लेख है। श्री कृष्ण का सुदर्शन चक्र एवं महादेव का त्रिशूल, श्री राम कर धनुष बाण और देवी दुर्गा का खड्ग इन दैवी शक्तियों की पहचान है। सहजयोगियों के लिए यह बहुत ज़रुरी है कि वे कला में उतरें और कला को समझें। आप पर सरस्वती की कृपा हमेशा बनी रहे। आत्मसाक्षात्कार के बाद अगर कला ली जाए तो वह बहुत ही सुघड़ और बहुत ही सहज हाथ में लग जाती है। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 4-4-92 आप सब सहजयोगियों को कला की समझ होनी चाहिए और कलात्मक चीजें आप लोग इस्तेमाल करें खास कर हाथ से बनी हुई। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 11-12-94, जयपुर कला मानव का अभिन्न अंग तथा उसकी शक्ति है, हमें कला विकसित करनी है क्योंकि परमात्मा के साम्राज्य का आनंद लेने के सिवा सहजयोग कुछ भी नहीं, यदि कला ही न होगी तो आप आनंद किसका लेंगे? परंतु कला पवित्र होनी चाहिए, पावित्र्य महत्वपूर्ण है और भारतीय संस्कृति में आज तक पवित्रता का सम्मान किया जाता है। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 20-3-94, कलकत्ता, खंड VI अंक 9-10-11-12, 1994 पृ.6 22

 Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. 10, Bhagyachintamani Co-op. Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India 411 038. Ph.: 020 - 65226031, 65226032, 25286537 email:sale@nitl.oc.in, website:www.nitl.co.in (For queries contact on above address)

 The amount of education you've had nobody had before, no saint had it. So now take full advantage. Whatever your age may be, education qualification maybe, what doesn't matter but you should all know what is Sahaja Yoga, what it means, how it works out. (HA Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Melbourne, 17 March 1985)



----------------------

2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-0.txt 
 YUVA दृष्टि
Apr.-Jun.2014
Some have tremendous powers of prayers...just by praying they have saved
the lives of many people. Your powers are based on love and compassion,
and you have to use your powers for the benevolence of the people.
(21-06-1992)
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-1.txt 
 TTOBURY
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-2.txt 
 hen you are listening to My tapes,
note down the points
what Mother has said,
and see for yourself. So the
education in Sahaja Yoga is
very important, otherwise
your intelligence will rust out.
(HH Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi,
Melbourne, 17 March 1985)
Inside
This Issue
Sahaj Culture ...4
सृजनशक्ति सरस्वती का आशीवाद है ...१८
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-3.txt 
 In the
Sahaj
culture
So, in the Sahaj culture, you see, we take it in a very balanced way. I find,
on the whole, Chinese are the same culture as Indians have about. So, you see,
is easier for Chinese to take to Sahaj culture. And the attitude – Sahaj attitude –
of witnessing everything, keeping in the center. I feel yesterday, that people
have very bad livers or diabetes here. Because they think too much, very
money-orientated. So, first of all, when they come you should try to give them
Realization, move their left up and right down, like that – from the backside.
That will really help them, but also the liver treatment of ice. Also you can put
ice on the left-hand side of the head, and on the backside for the eyes. For your
eyes also if you put the ice on the back.
it
21 April 1994
This glasses you may not need at all, may not need at all. Because you eat
fish too much, in India also Bengalis are the same, they eat too much fish. So,
they were very short and they were wearing glasses – that's they are. Same style:
great artists, very good at delicate work, music very delicate, everything – the
same way as the Chinese. And so many of you look like Bengalis: high cheek
bones, small eyes, exactly the same. If the Bengalis come here you won't be able
4
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-4.txt 
 Sahaj culture
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-5.txt 
 to recognize them. (Shri Mataji laughing)
Now, you see, they have improved also – the Sahaja Yogis. Their eye-sight has improved. So,
what you have to do is to take out the heat from the body. You can take out from the liver, you can
take out from the pancreas, from the brain and from the back-side [optic chiasma ?]. So, you can
take out from everywhere – putting the right hand towards the photograph. If you can get an ice;
do you get here ice? - Ice - hot water bottle – they have an ice-bottle also.
Yogi : They can also buy ready-made ice in plastic.
Shri Mataji : That's good.
So that, you see, once your health improves, your eyes improve, everything, then others will
also see it. You see, it's a proof of Sahaja Yoga. Also there is pollution problem. – Pollution. So,
with pollution it is affecting lungs. But with this treatment of cooling down your system, even the
lungs will improve because there is a right-heart will be affected.
As I told you, we have three medicines in Ayurveda which cools you down. So, when you are
coming there we'll get you those, how many people need it she will tell us. These three medicines
should be taken for a month, of August. I mean, it should be a very – you can call it a liver-diet
month, liver-treatment month-August.
I don't know if he'll send them to you from India, if you have any problems with customs or
anything.
Yogi :No, no,
Shri Mataji. No.
Shri Mataji : Medicines – so, we can send it in your place, somehow ... We'll ask somebody
to send it because I won't be there, but we can. So, in the month of August you plan up -all of you-
treat your liver, that's the best.
Even, I mean, I must say, despite the heat and all those things your livers are better than the
Western people. (Shri Mataji laughing) Western people have really horrible livers, no doubt. (Shri
Mataji laughing) So, once you feel better with your livers, you can do much better with others
also, because they all had yesterday liver very hot. So hot it was, I was perspiring all over. But for
liver-people they should never use the candle. No sunlight. They can sit in the moon-light, but not
sun-light; and should look after their Agnya by forgiving.
6-
[Hindi aside]
Now our whole thing is, how you people are – they will see. For them I am something
beyond. So, that's always so. So, one should not also frighten them, like he was telling Me he just
said that, in Sahaja Yoga nobody is a sinner – they are half run-away. (Shri Mataji laughing) They
wanted to be sinners, you see. (Shri Mataji laughing + laughter) But best is to make them sit
before, you can take the tape and play it, translate it – slowly, slowly. So that they settle down with
a tape. Then ask them to meditate. And then ask them if they are getting Cool Breeze or not. Just
ask them. And then raise their Kundalini. Don't touch them. Raise their Kundalini. But don't tell
them that you have to do this or that. Just it will clear out.
6.
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-6.txt 
 Now, supposing that their Left Vishuddhi is catching, then you just ask him, "Do you
feel guilty all the time?" You should not. But for Christians, if you tell them, "You are not
sinners," then they are finished. Because now the Church always says so. Now, they say a lot
of things. (Shri Mataji laughing)
Aside : Now you'll be able to translate it.
Shri Mataji : And it's a very important work now. You see, only by this you can
transform people. I felt yesterday they were all sitting there with big stress and strain on their
heads. I felt that. So, don't say anything, that would disturb them, but sooth them – it's the
best, soothing down. Now, they see us like this, they are being convinced that they are sinners
now. So, they just can't get it into their heads that, "We are not sinners." You see, "how can
that be, how Mother is saying we are not sinners?" You will notice I seldom use this word
'sin'. Because it has happened like that, that they think they are sinners, there is no
redemption – so, what's the use of becoming good? "In any way, we are a sinners." (Shri
Mataji laughing)
And also you should not laugh at their stupidity; sometimes they can be very stupid. So,
way they asked him questions was, "How to do meditation?" I said, “You don't have to do
it; you have to be in it." So, the Mantra is for that is, "Mother, You are thoughtless
awareness." That will remove their thoughts and they will be peaceful. And they will
meditate better. Because so far, you know, with these religions all over ... and their
conflicting effects. They are so conditioned and also confused. They were telling Me about
Shinto-religion, where they worshipped their, their – what?- ancestors.
the
99
Yesterday, a boy came and he told Me very interesting thing, that he is possessed by
bhoots, by spirits. And there are two other boys, or other people – one girl and one boy– who
are possessed. And they, the bhoots, they moved things from here to there, there to there. And
they are talking to them in their ears. These are the devils which Christ took out, you see, sort
of thing. But this fellow's thing was very interesting because he said, "We wanted to commit
suicide. And we could not," he said, "I could not get cool because I did not forgive those
bhoots, those devils. And they talk to us, and they tell us, 'We are Gods."" I'm sure these are
the ancestors, which are following them.
199
Otherwise, why should they go once, once [ inaudible ] And why should these children
be caught up? So, that shows that these ancestors are catching. They are interested in these
children. They were very young, twenty years of age, imagine. And they were just shaking
before Me like this. Then we took out the bhoots – and I asked him [ to put to My hand that
side, ] right hand, left hand towards Me. With a candle – they run away. He said, "They are
gone now, they are no more there." So, I asked him to cover himself up with something else;
and then go, so they won't recognize him. They are stupid fools, you know, these spirits also.
I mean, these spirits (Shri Mataji laughing)- such stupid fools. I've done this with many and I
have seen that it works. And the Kumkum on the head. That also the bhoots run away. So I
have told him, that you take the Kumkum vibrated and put it on the gates of this cemeteries.
The bhoots won't come out. (Shri Mataji laughing) That would be a nice idea.
99
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Buddha always had a light
And I don't know the Bhuddists because Buddha always had a light. He always had
Kumkum. And Sahaja Yogis went to this – caves we have near Bombay, [called ] Elephanta. And
there is a very big statue of Shiva. And when they entered in they said, "We were surprised, that
there was light here." As you know we have had lots of miraculous photographs. Of course, one
was there when in Ganapatipule this Madonna was standing before Me like a light. Also there is,
My face is not there, there's only the sun. That is the sign was given to Jews and Kalaki – described
like that. Kalaki has no face. And Jews also, they knew the one who is going to redeem them.
99
But you see, those people who are dull, who have no purpose in life, who do not seek, such
stupid people –even can doubt everything. (Shri Mataji laughing) They cannot believe that some
miracle can take place. But now I want to show you one photograph that was recently taken in
Brisbane, where appeared a rainbow. And I was there, and somebody took the photograph, and
very surprisingly, there is the photo – there is the painting upwards to Me.
[Hindi]Kalki. [Hindi]
Is amazingly in some painting -I don't know, may be of Michelangelo, or anything – of the
mother and the child is in the sky. Very clearly. Now, this Paramchaitanya is doing all kinds of
things – I don't know what to say. (Shri Mataji laughing) Unbelievable this one. Leave it to them.
But the non-believer cannot grasp it. You see, it's a kind of a growth and entirety of a person,
which can achieve it. Who is a seeker. It has to be that growth, otherwise it cannot ...
Shri Mataji aside : Show them also! Show around. Show everyone.
Shri Mataji : You also see?
It is sometimes conditioning, it's sometimes ego – but it is going too far because there are so
many, so many miraculous photographs. There is one in which Ganesha is standing behind Me,
with His big, big eyes. One is on My body – it is absolutely Ganesha. Only you can see the Sari
down. So, these are living Deities, they are not just imaginary.
And also the Shinto-Religion they have those Gods, they are all the same. But I don't know
what they have made of them... [I don't know, something.]
Now, for the Buddhist you should ask them to ask one question – it was future Buddha, is
described as 'Matreya'. So 'Matreya' is three Mothers together: Ma-Treya. So you just ask the
question, "Mother, are You Matreya?" That's all. It answers, it's – your body starts acting like a
computer. Just answers all the questions, even ifyou are not a Realized soul.
The sensitivity, I don't know, is much more among Russians because they are not so
materialistic, perhaps. They are so sensitive! Doctors, lawyers, professionals – above all, the
scientists. 250 scientists are there in Moscow, and 300 doctors, what do you say to that? And they
don't want to here anything about medical science, "Tell us about parasympathetic all the time.
Tell us about the Divine."
8
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Aside : You can do it [ inaudible].
Shri Mataji : When – once Gregoire was in Austria, I think, there the doctors told him, he
had pain in the thing, that they have to remove the whole thing from here to here. (Shri Mataji
laughing) That's it. He said, "Mother, what should I do?" I was in America, luckily. He said,
"Now they are going to take out my whole gums and everything from here. Then I am going to
loose the whole of it." About what sort of doctor it was given. He showed it to many, but all of
them said the same. So he said, "What to do, I have no leave also." So he said, "Gregoire, now
you have to tell some lies. Of course, it is not a lie also, that you should say that my friend has
telephoned to me, that there is an expert doctor in America, and I want to have leave to go to
America, let me try that." They had to say yes. So he took leave and came to America to the expert
doctor. And got cured in fifteen, twenty minutes. Otherwise they were going to remove him his
gums. Imagine, Gregoire without
99
gums.
Recently, I was in Brisbane again and somebody told Me that one Sahaja Yogini has been
admitted in the hospital and the doctor was saying that she'll die within one hours time because
she has meningitis. I know [Aradhna ?]. I said, “All right, she's not going to die at all." After one
hour she was perfectly all right. She went out of it.
99
66
But you must have a quality of faith. Seeing everything, even if you do not have the quality
of faith it doesn't work in you. That's only, I think as William Blake has said that, "These are a
special category of people. A special category of people, men of God. They will become Divine
and they'll make others Divine." Hundred years back He said it, hundred years back. Because it's
a special category of people.
99
With all these things also you must know that people are very conditioned. So gradually,
once they'll grow in Sahaja Yoga this quality of faith will become all right, because everything is
tangible. So telling all these things can be just a fairy-tale – and they may not accept you; but if
you raise their Kundalini, if you give them Realization and if they become one with this All-
pervading power then, you see, the quality of faith improves. And that quality of people only can
be saved. Others – Divine does not have any interest. So we should also not worry about such
people.
cannot feel the vibrations
Translator : Mr. Yang has a question.
Shri Mataji : Yes, yes, please!
Mr. Yang : [Says something in Chinese language - all laugh.]
Translator : He said he has been searching for a long time but he couldn't feel the Cool
Breeze.
Yogi : He cannot feel the vibrations. He cannot feel...
9.
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-9.txt 
 Shri Mataji : He is not feeling?
Yogi :Only a little.
Shri Mataji : (You can be in India)
Yogi : But also he didn't ... Do you meditate at home? Do you meditate? Do you meditate at
home?
Shri Mataji : Yes, meditation is it- otherwise you (do not improve.)
Yogi : Do it at home in the morning, everyday two times.
(To Shri Mataji:) He said, at home he does meditate.
Shri Mataji : Eh?
Yogi :At home he meditates, he says, but he doesn't come to the meetings.
Shri Mataji : Oh, that happened! As I told you, if a nail is cut out of the body it doesn't grow.
You must come to the collectivity, it's very important. Did you go to some Guru or somebody?
Yogi : He was in TM.
Shri Mataji: That's it. You can see. For TM is more necessary, because to get out of TM is
not easy. Horrible, TM is the worst, I think. That's why I said why he is catching in the left. Left
Swadisthana is –
Translator : He asked, what shall he do? (Laughter) What should he do? What to do?
Shri Mataji : With a TM?
Yogi : He wants, what he can do now? Treatment or meditation, what does he do.
Shri Mataji : He has a left Swadisthana, so he has to use the candle, no doubt. And the TM is
to be really sort of beaten up with shoes, I think something. It's horrible.
Yogi : And he is keeping still in contact. Last year he was going to America to meditate with
TMs still.
Shri Mataji : They are very ... they grip you like that. You see the people who have been to
TM have lost their houses. Their children are removed from schools, they are just on the streets.
And they were jumping, you see – on the mattresses and they broke their bottoms. And they
demanded, you see, they demanded money for that and these people got the money. Their bottoms
were broken. There was one fellow who was running their flying academy, Peter (Pears.)
Shri Mataji to the audience: Sit down all, sit down.
Shri Mataji : Why do they want to go around at about three feet-level? (Shri Mataji
laughing) All right, that failed. So now, new marketing has started: Ayurveda.
(Poor catches) talking about that. And also there is one (Prabir Chopra) who is going down
mesmerising people. Horrible. Very troublesome.
Yogi : Shri Mataji, there's also this (GuruMaya) with Sitar-courses.
10
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Shri Mataji : She came here?
Yogi : Yes, Shri Mataji. All of the TM people who came to Sahaja Yoga went then to this
Guru-Maya afterwards.
Shri Mataji : Aach! And now they will be caught, very badly, they will suffer a lot. Because,
you see, she is the devil absolutely – she sells vibrated shawls. Her father – she is an illegitimate
child of (Muktanand), she and her brother. And her father had diamonds one-six-hundred crores.
Crore is hundred thousand, hundred hundred thousand- of pounds.
Aside : It is going very hot soon.
Shri Mataji : You can feel the Cool Breeze? You just come closer. Like a fan. There is a
failure ...more on the right, less on the left ... left is catching, really, left is a problem. Put your
left like this, and right on the Mother Earth... (sounds like: Put it close (inaudible) Very sole.)
Yogi : Shri Mataji, they also have a thing, they go to sauna everyday.
Shri Mataji : He?
Yogi : They are going to the sauna every day. Sauna– hot, hot, hot steam.
Another Yogi : Sometimes, not every day.
Shri Mataji : Sauna, Sauna is [ inaudible ] (Laughter) Sauna bath is all right. For him heat is
good. Sunlight is good. But now TM has to go away. Are you feeling the cool?
Yogi : Yes, Shri Mataji.
Shri Mataji : Are you feeling fan-like thing? All right.
Yogi : (inaudible)
Shri Mataji : Worst! They are going round from one to another, to another, to another – I
mean marketing is sometime. We have a Rajiv Kumar in the government, he is a very high
official, and he said that the secretary of one of the departments put all these into TM, and they are
all suffering.
Translator : He asked, from now on, what he should do?
Yogi : He asked from now on, what he should do.
Shri Mataji : I am just telling him that he should take the left-side treatment and beat TM
with shoes.
Yogi : Shoe-beating, shoe-beating. And don't go to the (inaudible).
Shri Mataji : And if he has any books or anything - you should throw them away. Ah, better
now. Better?
Is this the sari you have to give Me?
Yogi : This is the Puja sari for Thee because of...
Shri Mataji : Puja. That you have to give Me in Guru Puja.
Yogi : Guru Puja.
11
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-11.txt 
 (several Yogis are talking, and also Shri Mataji: inaudible)
Yogi : We wanted to ask this.
Shri Mataji : (inaudible) It's all right, get it laid, get it. She can, all right. Give it to Me at
Guru-Puja. It's a very nice sari, they could all see it.
Feel a Tension inside...
Yogini : Mother, I feel the CoolBreeze, but I always feel a tension inside and.
Shri Mataji : She feels the Cool Breeze?
Yogi : Mother, she feels tension, she feels the tension inside.
Shri Mataji : Tension. See, Ekadesha, you have a problem.
Yogini : Inside of the Nabhi.
Shri Mataji: You see, it is your liver again.
Yogini : Liver?
Shri Mataji : Very bad. It is on Ekadesha, is showing here, it's serious. So, left to the right
have to put it like that, to take out the tension. You don't feel Cool Breeze in the head, do you?
you
See? But still it's the liver.
Yogini : Mother, may I have a name?
Shri Mataji : What is your name?
Yogini : My name is Elisabeth.
Shri Mataji : Elisabeth. One name of the Goddess is Priyamvadha. Priyamvadha, but you
can call her Priya. Priya. Priya is the [girl ?], but Priyamvadha means the Goddess. Her Quality is
to speak something that pleases you, which is learnable. Priyamvadha. And the short form is
Priya.
Yogini : Shri Mataji, I also would like to get a name.
Shri Mataji : Yes, say it!
Yogi: Gerlinde, she also said–it is Gerlinde Ringhofer, she also liked to have a name.
Shri Mataji : She is ...?
Yogi : Her name is Gerlinde Ringhofer, and she wants also a name.
Shri Mataji: Gerlinde?
Yogi : Gerlinde.
Shri Mataji : Gerlinde?
12
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Yogi: Gerlinde – "ger" means a spear ..
66
Shri Mataji : Ahh! (Shri Mataji laughing) Lakshmi, Lakshmi is all right. Is easier. All right.
So, now we have to go also. It's time.
Young Yogini :Mother, may I have a name?
Shri Mataji :Yes, you say.
Yogi : He wants a name.
Young Yogini : May I have a name?
Yogi : He wants a name.
Shri Mataji : Name?
Yogi : Both of them want a name, I think ... (Laughter) Both of them want a name, Shri
Mataji. The girl wants a name, and she wants also a name.
Shri Mataji : See, I– these days I don't give names, but I will now – this time – but it ...
Now, a better name. The name of'Kamala', means the Lakshmi again, Kamala.
Yogi : For the girl?
Shri Mataji : Meenakshi. (Laughter) Yours is Meenakshi then.
Yogini : But (my friend) is also called like this, Kamala Minakshi (inaudible). (Laughter)
Yogini : Meenakshi!
Translator : Mother, she felt a Cool Breeze on top of her head, but she has a problem in the
Nabhi.
Shri Mataji:You went to some Guru, or somebody?
Yogini : Before I met You. Rajneesh.
Yogis : Ah, Rajneesh. Rajneesh.
Yogini :Ah! But I gave up, (inaudible).
Shri Mataji : Put your right hand on here, and put your left hand towards Me, and you have
to say: "Mother, You are my master". Or: “I am my own master." It's better. "I am my own
Master", again.
99
Yogini :I am my own master.
Shri Mataji :Again.
Yogini :I am my own master.
Shri Mataji : Again.
Yogini :I ammy own master.
Shri Mataji : Again.
Yogini :I am my own master.
13
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Shri Mataji : Again. Don't cry.
Yogini (weeping) :I am my own master.
Shri Mataji :A master cannot cry. All right, say: "I am my own master."
Yogini:I am my own master.
Shri Mataji : Again.
Yogini :I am my own master.
Shri Mataji : Again.
Yogini :I am my own master.
Shri Mataji : Correct- again.
Yogini :I am my own master.
Shri Mataji :Again.
Yogini:I am my own master.
Shri Mataji : Better now?
Yogini : Yeah!
Shri Mataji : You know, there is nothing to feel bad – because you are a seeker. As a seeker
you always get lost, but if you come back it's all right. Once you have come back you are there– ll
right? Better now? You get it-Cool Breeze, in the left hand? All right, this is your mantra.
Translator :Your mantra: 'I am my own master."
Heart Catch
Translator : He has a question.
Shri Mataji : What?
Translator : Why he has a heart catch?
Shri Mataji : Yeah? Very right-sided.
Yogis : You are right-sided.
Shri Mataji : Yes, you see the heart catches from the right side. Put your right hand on your
heart, then come forward. May God bless you! You just have to say, "Mother, come in my heart."
Twelve times, "Please come in my heart."
Yogi (six times) : Mother, please come into my heart.
Shri Mataji : Again. Again please say it.
14
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart.
Shri Mataji : Again.
Yogi: Mother, please come into my heart.
Shri Mataji : Again.
Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart.
Shri Mataji : Again.
Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart.
Shri Mataji : Again.
Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart.
Shri Mataji : Again.
Yogi : Mother, please come into my heart.
Shri Mataji : That's it. You are all right now? (Yogi sneezes. Shri Mataji laughing.)
Whenever you say, I am available. You say, "come into my head!", I will be there. You say,
"Come in my stomach!" I will be there. Anywhere you say-I am there.
66
Translator : Now he says, when he is meditating, the vibration is easy and Cool Breeze is
easy-but during the day...
Shri Mataji : Yeah, yeah.
Translator : ... it is very difficult.
Shri Mataji : Then you should just close your eyes and think of Me. That's the only thing I
can say.
Translator : He says, "It is very easy to catch."
Shri Mataji : Eh?
Translator: Very easy to catch, sometimes.
Shri Mataji : Then before going out you should take a Bandhan. And also meditate, and
before sleeping also take a Bandhan. Put your attention to Sahasrara before sleeping, it's better.
Gradually, you see, it purifies you completely. You have to have patience, that's all.
Yogi : He tries to cure people.
Shri Mataji : Ah?
Yogi : He is trying to cure people. He is trying to cure other people.
Shri Mataji : Aya ... he should take Bandhan and he can do it, but don't touch them. Best is
to give them photographs. That's all. Them also a Bandhan. Yourself, and to them also. Yes, and -
you can give photographs, it's the best. And tell them to meditate. Don't touch them, because they
are quite complicated to begin with.
(Shri Mataji gets a present.)
15
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Shri Mataji : What's it? Oh, you have done it! (Laughter and applause) O My God, it's done
so beautifully.
Yogi :Looks nice. (Laughter)
Shri Mataji : I am not so beautiful like this. (Laughter) Very sweet. Thank you very much!
You should write your name here. They are artists, I must say. Such a little girl.
Better now! Are you better? Is he better now! Are you better now?
Yogi : Much better.
Shri Mataji : Are you better now? Better. Now sit with a – never sit with a locked gate, with
an Asanas. With a Sahaja Asana, like him. Sahaja Asana. Sahaja Asana, like this: Sahaja Asana.
(Many are talking, also Shri Mataji: inaudible)
Shri Mataji :Not to lock up. Now it's better, now.
Translator : Mr Yang says his left hand is cool.
Shri Mataji : Right hand on the Mother Earth.
Translator : Right hand put on the Mother Earth.
Shri Mataji : If it is a right-hand-problem, then put the right hand towards the photograph
and left hand upwards. It's very simple – Sahaja Yoga. No, no, no, no. Left hand towards the
photograph, in your case. Photograph. Towards Me, now. And the right hand on the Mother Earth.
Because left side goes in the Mother Earth; and right side goes into the ether.
For the colour change of the skin
Yogini (silently): Mother, Mother, Mother– You mentioned this birthmark can be cured by
Sahaja Yoga treatment. (Laughter)
Yogi : She is a very little, very little kind of a nevus, very little for the colour change of the
skin, and she is worried about the daughter about that.
Shri Mataji : What is less?
Yogi : Come, come on.
Yogis : Birthmark. Oh God! Birthmark.
[inaudible ] She is worried about the birthmark ... (inaudible).
Yogis : ...
Shri Mataji : Let's see that go away. You tried something for that? Nevus.
Yogi : Because I told her, she shouldn't worry about it, because she is a beautiful girl. She
shouldn't worry about that.
16
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Shri Mataji : Ha ha! She does. But Haldi is very good for her. You get in India
something like Turmeric.
Yogi : We have here Haldi, Shri Mataji. We have...
Shri Mataji : That cools Me also. (They doubt), they get in England, (they
doubt). These are all (itching) things, but let's try.
Yogi : Like in the marriage ceremony you put it, you make it wet and put it in?
Shri Mataji : It's – get a tube. Some are going to send Me these medicines, on the
Diwali. I asked somebody to send it from Pune.
Yogi : Shri Mataji, can you repeat the names please first?
Shri Mataji : All right, write it down! The first one is Chandanas. This you have
to take one spoon after breakfast. One table-spoon, or maybe small spoon. To begin
with, let's start with one, yes? Then one table-spoon. Then you have to take another
one which is called as Oudumber, Oudumber. O-u-d-u-m-b-e-r, Oudumber-water.
That you should take after lunch and after dinner. The best start, it is the easiest to send
a Sabchasi, s-a-b-ch-ai, Sabchasi. They are very cheap. Now, you soak sabchasis in
the water – before sleeping. And early in the morning, just after brushing your
This is also one tea-spoon full, you have to soak. Brushing the teeth you take that
water. So much of water we do. Drink the water and also eat the sabchasis. Which get
teeth.
swollen up. This is for liver.
Also some people have vomiting sensation and all that, in that case. Or
migraines. This, you can take it in winter: is ginger, which is mixed with lemon and
salt. You could eat ginger, raw ginger.
Yogi : As a powder, or fresh ginger?
Shri Mataji : No, no, no, not powder. Ginger. Raw ginger.
Yogi : Raw.
Shri Mataji: With food or something.
Yogi : Yes, they cook a lot with ginger, the Chinese.
Shri Mataji : Yeah. But also powder of ginger – you can take early in the
morning before anyone else, with sugar. For example you press a spoon. I will show
you: a little bit should be taken first of all the powder. And should be covered with
vibrated sugar.
17
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-17.txt 
 का]
भ
सृजनशक्ति
सरस्वती का आशीर्वाद है
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-18.txt 
 कला की ओर दृष्टि बढ़ाने से जीवन में सौन्दर्य आ जाता है...
यह सृजनशक्ति सरस्वती का आशीर्वाद है जिसके द्वारा अनेक कलायें अत्पन्न हुई ...कला की ओर
दृष्टि बढ़ाने से एक तो जीवन में सौन्दर्य आ जाता है और जीवन का रहन- सहन सुन्दर हो जाता है ...हमारे
ऊबड़ खाबड़ जीवन में यदि थोड़ी सी कला की झलक आ जाए तो बड़ा सुख और आनंद मिलता है ।
अगर आप कला को बगैर आत्मसाक्षात्कार के ही अपनाना चाहें तो वह कला अधूरी रह जाती है ...
अगर आत्मसाक्षात्कारी मनुष्य ...कोई कलात्मक चीज़ बनाता है तो उसमें से भी चैतन्य आने लग जाता है। सुन्दर
होने के साथ साथ ऐसी कृति में एक तरह की अनन्तशक्ति होती है ... क्योंकि उसने जो कुछ भी बनाया है
आत्मा की अनुभूति से बनाया है।...हाथ से बनी हुई चीजों में चैतन्य बहता है ... हाथ से बनी चीजों के द्वारा
अपने हृदय का आनंद हम दूसरों को समर्पित करते हैं ।..कलात्मक चीजू हठात आपको निर्विचारिता में उतारेगी
....क्योंकि सौन्दर्य देखने से ही चैतन्य एक दम बहने लगता है।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 4-4-92, यमुना नगर, खंड IV, अंक 3-4, 1992
कला का जो भी कार्य हम करते हैं वह परमात्मा को समर्पित होना चाहिए। इस भाव से की गई सभी
रचनायें शाश्वत होंगी। परमात्मा को समर्पित सभी कवितायें, संगीत और कलाकृतियाँ आज भी जीवित हैं...
कला परमात्मा की ज्योति है... इनमें चैतन्य लहरियाँ है।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 3-2-92, कलकत्ता, खंड IV, अंक V, VI, 1992
भारतीय काव्य कला
भारतीय काव्यकला के अन्तर्गत सारे वैदिक ग्रंथों का असीम भंडार है जिसकी भाषा संस्कृत है । वैदिक
ग्रंथों के साथ कालिदास , माघ, भारवि, भवभूति, दंडी तथा बाणभट्ट जैसे साहित्य साधकों की पद्य व गद्य में
लिखित कृतियाँ तथा पालि, प्राकृत व अपभ्रंशभाषा में रचा गया सारा बौद्ध और जैन साहित्य भारतीय काव्य
कला के प्रमुख अंश है । भारत की बंगला मराठी आदि प्रादेशिक भाषाओं और अवधी, ब्रजभाषा व भोजपुरी
जैसी बोलियों में भी अनेक प्रसिद्ध ग्रंथ लिखे गए हैं ।
साहित्य क्या है? इसे स + हित कहते हैं अर्थात हितकारी। यदि वह हितकारी नहीं है तो साहित्य नहीं
व्यर्थ है।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 23-2-92, न्यूजीलैंड, खंड IV, अंक 7-8, 1992
शारदा देवी की कृपा से (अपने देश में) बहुतों ने बहुत कुछ लिखा। ज्ञानेश्वर जी ने ' ज्ञानेश्वरी' लिखी
और उसके बाद एक और किताब (अमृतानुभव) इतनी सुन्दर है कि ऐसा लगता है कि आप अमृत पी रहे हों।
संतों ने लिखा जिन पर शारदा देवी की कृपा हुई। शरदचन्द्र गुर आप पढ़िए तो आप कहानी लिखना शुरु कर
19
|
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-19.txt 
 देंगे। ऐसे ऐसे लेखक अपने यहाँ हो गए इस भारतवर्ष में कि ऐसे कहीं नहीं हुए होंगे। ..
राजस्थान में उसकी ( देवी सरस्वती की ) बड़ी कृपा रही । यहाँ बड़े-बड़े कवि हो गए और यहाँ
से अलेक्ज़ेन्डर (सिकन्दर) भी यहाँ की संस्कृति देखकर इतने अचंभे में पड़ गए तो वापस गए
और अपने साथ चंद्रवर्दाई को ले गए। एक बड़े भारी कवि है चंद्रवर्दाई यहीं के हैं , राजस्थान के
हैं... फिर सूफियों में खसरो हैं। क्या कवितायें हैं | कबीरदास हैं। गुरु नानक साहब का तो
कहना ही क्या वो तो गुरु हैं। रामदास स्वामी (हैं)बंगाल में भी क्या एक से एक कवि हो गए
और ये सब शारदा देवी की कृपा से। सारे शब्दों से मानोधर्म बहता हो। प्रकाश और सारे ही
शब्द इनके व्यवस्थित ऐसा लगता है मानो निर्विचारिता में लिखे गए हों। इतने शुद्ध वर्णन ये
हम ज़रूर कहेंगे कि सबसे ज्यादा संस्कृत में और उसके बाद मराठी में ही अध्यात्म पे किताबें
बढ़िया लिखी। न जाने बड़ी गहराई से अध्यात्म पे काम किया गया ... अब यही सोचिए अंग्रेजी
भाषा में आत्मा के लिए Spirit शब्द है, है ना? शराब को भी Spirit और भूत को भी ये कोई
भाषा हुई?... फ्रेंच भाषा तो उससे भी गई बीती, एकदम, उसमें चेतना के लिए कोई शब्द नहीं।.
उनके (शारदा) आशीर्वाद से ही जितने महान ग्रंथ हैं वो बने । कितने महान नाटक या
कादम्बरियाँ लिखी गई वो सब शारदा देवी के आशीर्वाद से ..
श्रीमाताजी, 11-12-94, जयपुर
प.पू.
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी ने बताया है
" ओम" से बना है... हम जानते नहीं हमारा संगीत कितना
भारत का जो संगीत है।
ऊँचा है, इस संगीत में सारा ओम है।
यह आत्मा का संगीत है, इससे हमारे हाथ के वायब्रेशन बढते हैं और इससे परम
.. ...
शान्ति मिलती है।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 16-3-84, दिल्ली
मैं आपको 'राग' के विषय में बताऊँगी- 'रा' का अर्थ है शक्ति और 'ग' शब्द का
भारत का जो
है।
अर्थ है जो हमारे अन्दर प्रवेश कर जाए, यह आकाश तत्त्व का गुण
आकाश तत्त्व में यदि
संगीत है " ओम'"
आप कोई शब्द डाल दें तो आप ब्रह्माण्ड के किसी भी कोने में पकड़ सकते हैं तो राग वह
से बना है... हम
शक्ति है जो आकाश तत्त्व में प्रवेश कर जाती है, अर्थात आपकी आत्मा ही राग है।
जानते नहीं हमारा
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 14-8-88, जार्ज श्वेस
संगीत कितना
ऊँचा है, इस
संस्कृत भाषा की विशेषता ये है कि एक-एक अक्षर मंत्र है।
संगीत में सारा
जब तक आप संस्कृत में श्लोक नहीं कहते, मेरे चक्र चलते ही
नहीं, आश्चर्य की
ओम है।
... ...
बात है।
20
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-20.txt 
 ा
ा
ॐ
YAMAHA
मंत्र विद्या का बड़ा भारी शास्त्र है।
...हमारे प्राचीन ग्रंन्थों में नाना प्रकार के
वाद्ययंत्रों का उल्लेख मिलता है। इन्हें चार
भागों में विभक्त किया गया है'
...
...
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 3-2-78, दिल्ली
हमारे देश का जो संगीत है और नृत्य है, ऐसा कहीं भी दुनियाँ में
तंत्रीगत वाद्ययंत्र का
1. तंत्रीगत
नहीं है कहीं भी... ये सब आपके भारत की संस्कृति है... संगीत देहात में
साधारण नाम वीणा है। "संगीत दमोदर
ग्रन्थ" में वीणा के उन्तीस प्रकार-भेद और
गाते हैं, लोग कितना शुद्ध, कितने प्रेम से और शारदा देवी के पूर्ण
आशीर्वाद से ।
उनका विस्तृत वर्णन दिया है- जैसे
ब्रह्मवीणा, किन्नरी, सांरंगी, पिनाकी, त्रिदायी,
घोषवली आदि आदि। श्री नारद की वीणा
चर्चित रही है, देवी सरस्वती का नाम ही
वीणा वादिनी है।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 11-12-94, जयपुर
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी ने राजस्थान की कला की बहुत सराहना की है-
इस राजस्थान में जो कला का प्रादुर्भाव हुआ है ...ये बिलकुल
शारदा देवी का ही आशीर्वाद है इसमें कोई शक नहीं। ऐसी ऐसी
नक्काशियाँ, ऐसी ऐसी चीज़े बनाने लग गए लोग हाथ से अपने,
...
...
2. चर्मवाद्य यंत्र
यानी चर्म से
आच्छादित वाद्य जैसे- मुरज, झल्ली, ढपली,
बड़ा
डमरू, दुन्दभी, मृदंग, स्तुंग आदि।
आश्चर्य।... अब सारे पाटरी (pottery) में देख लीजिए कहीं देख लीजिए।
3. रन्ध्रयुक्त वाद्य- जो खोखली लकडी
से बनाए जाते है, इनसे छिद्र होते हैं जैसे
वंशी, मुरली, तोरही, मृंग, स्वरनाभि आदि।
क्या सुन्दर सुन्दर कला, बढ़िया ऐसे रंग-बिरंगी ऐसी चीज़ें... रंगों की हमारे
यहाँ जो साड़ियाँ बनती हैं, कपड़े बनते हैं, लहँगे बनते हैं वे सब उनके
( पार्चात्य) देश में कहाँ? बहुत ही कलापूर्ण यहाँ (राजस्थान ) के लोग
हैं, बहुत सुंदर इतने सुन्दर घर आपको मेरे ख्याल से हिन्दुस्तान में कहीं
4. धातुनिर्मित वाद्य- जैसे करताल,
जयघंटा, झंझताल, मंजीरा घंटी, घुंघरू आदि ।
नहीं मिलेंगे... अपने देश मे जो कुछ कलाकारों ने बनाया
उसकी इज्ज़त
21
|
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-21.txt 
 करनी चाहिए... अजंता जैसी चीज कोई नहीं बना सकता... सो कला में रुचि रखना और अपने देश
की कला को पहले अपनाना चाहिए।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 11-12-94, जयपुर
हमारा संगीत हमारी कलायें हमारा जो कुछ भी है बड़ा गहन है उसको समझिए क्या चीज है।
उसकी गहनता में घुसें। मैं चाहूँगी आपसे जितना भी बन पड़े हमारे संगीत के बारे में, कला के बारे में
जानने का प्रयत्न करें। जो अपनी कला को नहीं जानते अपनी भारत माँ को नहीं जानते, वे इस माता को
प्यार कैसे कर सकते हैं?
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 25-3-85, दिल्ली, निर्मला योग जु.अग.2008
हमारे अस्त्र-शस्त्र
प्राचीन भारत के आर्य पुरुष अस्त्र - शस्त्र विद्या में निपुण थे, उन्होंने आतताइयों एवं दुष्टों के दमन
के लिए नाना प्रकार के अस्त्र शस्त्रों की सृष्टि की थी । हमारे यहाँ दिव्य अस्त्र थे जो मंत्रों से चलाये
जाते थे, प्रत्येक शस्त्र पर भिन्न-भिन्न देव शक्ति का अधिकार होता था जैसे- आग्नेय, पर्जन्य,
गरुड़,
ब्रह्मास्त्र, पाशुपत आदि। गदा, मुग्दर, चक्र, वज्र, शूल, खड्ग, फरसा, धनुष-वाण, बछी, कुल्हाड़ी
आदि अनेक अस्त्र-शस्त्र का उल्लेख है। श्री कृष्ण का सुदर्शन चक्र एवं महादेव का त्रिशूल, श्री राम
कर धनुष बाण और देवी दुर्गा का खड्ग इन दैवी शक्तियों की पहचान है।
सहजयोगियों के लिए यह बहुत ज़रुरी है कि वे कला में उतरें और कला को समझें। आप पर
सरस्वती की कृपा हमेशा बनी रहे। आत्मसाक्षात्कार के बाद अगर कला ली जाए तो वह बहुत ही सुघड़
और बहुत ही सहज हाथ में लग जाती है।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 4-4-92
आप सब सहजयोगियों को कला की समझ होनी चाहिए और कलात्मक चीजें आप लोग
इस्तेमाल करें खास कर हाथ से बनी हुई।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 11-12-94, जयपुर
कला मानव का अभिन्न अंग तथा उसकी शक्ति है, हमें कला विकसित करनी है क्योंकि परमात्मा
के साम्राज्य का आनंद लेने के सिवा सहजयोग कुछ भी नहीं, यदि कला ही न होगी तो आप आनंद
किसका लेंगे? परंतु कला पवित्र होनी चाहिए, पावित्र्य महत्वपूर्ण है और भारतीय संस्कृति में आज तक
पवित्रता का सम्मान किया जाता है।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 20-3-94, कलकत्ता, खंड VI
अंक 9-10-11-12, 1994 पृ.6
22
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
10, Bhagyachintamani Co-op. Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud,
Pune, Maharashtra, India 411 038. Ph.: 020 - 65226031, 65226032, 25286537
email:sale@nitl.oc.in, website:www.nitl.co.in (For queries contact on above address)
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_II.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The amount of education you've had
nobody had before, no saint had it. So now
take full advantage. Whatever your age may
be, education qualification maybe, what
doesn't matter but you should all know what
is Sahaja Yoga, what it means, how it works
out.
(HA Shri Mataji Nirmala Devi, Melbourne, 17 March 1985)
