YUVA दृष्टि Jan.-Mar.2014 ITA Some have tremendous powers of prayers...just by praying they have saved the lives of many people. Your powers are based on love and compassion, and you have to use your powers for the benevolence of the people. (21-06-1992) THE

 Inside This Issue Attention should be on collective things ...4 Conversation about Chastity ...9 Conversation with yogis ...12 निराकार-साकार स्वरूप...१८

 24 April 1994 Attention should be on collective things.... оп со So liver should be treated. And next time when you come to India we are going to get you all the medicines of liver. If they are very fat then they are left sided. Try to bring them to the center with the three candle treatment. But first of all test it what is the situation. Sometime they developed the puffy fat that is alright. They will become alright. That is how should look after their health. Then also look after you their behavior. Tell them how to behave. So I have seen in west the children are not properly brought up because parents neglect them. I won't blame the children. Parents neglect them it should be loving, kind and at the same time should must tell them what is discipline is. It is very important. you Then Keep a watch on them. How they are? What they are doing? Of course we have school but it has limited seats there. Whatever it is, they are going to adjust as a many as possible. Even then supposing you have any problem, do not go arbitrarily in to it. You may ask your leader or you may write to me and inform me. Among you somebody might become very ego oriented, may start his own organization, I will do this. Let him say you get out and he will suffer. You do not have to worry. Alright you get out. Anybody who is arbitrary will not work out. Suppose one finger starts working more than other means it is cancer that is malignancy. We can not have malignancy. All of you should work together with understanding, before others as well among yourselves. It is very important to understand.

 Now, Sahaja-yoga has worked out in so many countries. In such a big way in some and in such a small way in some. But wherever, Sahajayogi have to be something special. Even the Children have to be something special. You have any other problems which you do not want to discuss, you discuss it your leader and then you can write to me directly, no harm. Either If I answer well and good and if I do not answer also well and good, it will work out. But attention should not be all the time about yourself. Me, my family, my children, my house, my job, No. As soon as your attention goes on another people, it works fast. It helps, very much. But on your self, I am sick; I have this problem that problem, nothing. You are now at the stage when you can absolutely solve all the problem but first and foremost thing is if your attention is on yourself then it won't work out. Attention should be on others. And if it has to be on yourself, attention then just find what is wrong with me. But some people in that also go too far. Mother my Agyna is catching, Mother my this is caching, it is nonsense. May be you are catching from other people, its possible. There are some nice books, now already in Sahajayoga translated in Chinese luckily and also my tapes could be translated also. But you have to keep my voice as I told you because that is mantra, isn't it? And you can have subtitle, it would be better if you could do it. That is a very good idea that you can have subtitles, really. Specially, for Russian if they could do in Russia. Now if you have any question you can ask me. So it should be always like, ifyou are Chinese, then you should not only deal with Chinese. They should all come to the collective. Supposing you are Indians, you should not only deal with the Indians, but they should come to the collective. Because unless and until they come to the collective they will not know what the problem is? It is not that you can organize separately a group, another group separately. It has to be one group. Of course you could have two ashrams or three ashrams, makes no difference. Any other question? Sahajayogi : is the Camphor treatment is for left side? Shri Mataji : What? Sahajayogi : camphor treatment? The Camphor treatment? Shri Mataji : What? Sahajayogi : he is asking if the camphor treatment is good for left side. Shri Mataji: what? Shri Mataji : No no no no. No need. Camphor, only once in a while. Do not do camphor. But you have done all mixed up thing, you see. Just do left side treatment and you will be alright, just mixed up. And you can not earn money on the name of GOD or divine work that is one thing. You can not organize like that. No Never. Because once you start getting like this left sided Bhoot will come into it. That is the part of Sahajayog. We can not. Also if you have any guru's photograph and all that it is better to put them in the sea. Because this keeping any photograph, any book about them creates problems. So religiously search out and put them in the sea. [Shri Mataji looked at something] "No no no no no no no"." No no no" Don't do all that. They will work on the photograph. If you 6.

 want to help somebody, you see some other people who have come, who want to raise, do not touch them. Take a bandhan yourself and give them a bandhan. Put them before the photograph and you just raise the Kundalini. But be careful. Because you are still, you see, not that sort of thing that you cannot catch. You Might catch. So Among yourselves also you should not do that. Do not touch. If somebody says I have this problem alright. Put him on the photograph. Take a bandhan yourself. Ask them to take a bandhan. You also give a bandhan and then raise the Kundalini. Be careful. Even if there is somebody who has came now, who is sick man. So you can give them a photograph, it is alright if they are willing to do it. But somebody in his family is willing to take Sahajayoga, who is a healthy person he should bring. Otherwise don't get after sick person. You will have many sick, in thousands, to begin with. Do not worry about sick. If they are sick tell them to take the photograph and work it out if they are left sided or right sided. Then the faith grows it improves. But you do not touch the sick. No no. Not at all. You are not here to cure sick. But we are here to give realisation. May God bless you. Sahajayogi : For technique, if you have a problem on one side, you have balance in left side is weak [Not clear], Do you raise Kundalini on this side and give bandhan to the other side. Shri Mataji : Supposing you are right sided then you have to put down the right side, remember that way it is much much better. Then you raise your left side and put on right side if you have right side problem. If you have left side problem so you have to put down the left side. It is easier to remember this way. So there is no confusion. But tying of Kundalini should be done after moved out left to right or right to left, which ever way and then raise your Kundalini and tie up and take a bandhan, it is the best way. have you I would request you all of you to take photograph of yours and make an album, write it down below that what is your name, date of birth and of self realisation. Send it over to me because I go on seeing that sometimes. So, I know you better and also I will allow my attention on you, of children and as well as of bigger people. So I will talk to you and talk to him because you have little individual problem, both of you. So what about you? Are you reconcile? Ha? ..I am going to get her. [Not clear] He came here to do Sahajayoga and not to disturb a family. He is been very wrong. I am going to be very angry with him. He is an old Sahajayogi, he should have behaved himself. [Not clear] You have such sweet beautiful children. I will never support you in nonsense, i must tell you. And your husband is very good man and if you behave alright he will come round to Sahajayoga. I am sure. You can not be a Sahajayogi if you have no dharma, "Shield". As Buddha has called. As we called. As the Your character, your morality is the most important in Sahajayoga. If you are not moral it has no meaning at all. What you need is morality. This is happening everywhere, nonsense. We have to imbibe it in ourselves and we have to generate it for others also. Whole world is full of immoral people. Very very few who are standing for morality? It was the greatest ornament we have, Alright? Don't go after. This will never help you? It was very wrong of you and also for your children. Now go back and behave yourself properly otherwise you cannot be in Sahajayoga. Ha, If there is something wrong then it is alright. We have divorce in Sahajayoga. We allow divorce in Sahajayoga. But there should be substantial reason for that. "Or to sub thik hai". What we do? May God Bless you all.

 Once you know the Опcе Mooladhara is so important for everything, even for тaterial gain, pеоple will start to look after the Mooladhara. 8

 Conversation about Chastity 9 September 1986 One thing is Mooladhara is good. Indians have one advantage; they have a good Mooladhara, you see. Eyes are good. That's what Salim was telling me that they do everything that [sounds like: Sagaricles] are doing are doing but not chastity. That part they don't compromise. Naturally, the attention is good. Once you know the Mooladhara is so important for everything, even for material gain, people will start to look after the Mooladhara. But logically you can see, it's very logical that if your Mooladhara is all right, you have a nice family life, you have good children, they become obedient, your attention is concentrated, whatever you work you grow, you do it with concentration. There's no diversion. There's no – sort of, nobody can befool you because your Mooladhara is all right. Any girl who is good-looking can come and entice you, murder you, take away all your money. Or the other way round. Could be anything. I mean, you are solidly placed if you have a nice Mooladhara. You may go anywhere. Nobody can cheat you. In India it's too much a strong feeling from tradition, I think. In our country we had three thousand women burnt themselves on a fire – 'Jauhara' because the Muslims had won the battle and they would enter into the fort. So they burnt themselves up. Very common in Bombay also. So many cases where women jumped sixteen stories to save their chastity. For innately it's built in us this Mooladhara is very important. That's our property. That's our power. Mooladhara you save. They will cheat the Government, all right, very well. They are very good at cheating Government, tell lies, do what you like, but as far as Mooladhara is concerned there they are; as long as Mooladhara is all right. Even men now, men have a great sense of chastity in India. Of course, westernized men may not be. They are very innocent. They cannot see many things that you people can do like I saw Kharde. It doesn't enter his head. He doesn't understand. Same with Me. Why should I laugh at him? I am just saying, but at least I am better than him. Now I understand little bit but Mr Kharde is absolutely an innocent person, you know, very innocent man. He said, “But why do they do it? But why?" They can't explain that why people do it. 9.

 The questions are like this one mister ... he was quite young. He came to me. He said, "Why do young people in the west leave their parents? Supposing I leave my parents, will their bhoots leave me"? He asked, "Will the bhoots of my parents leave me"? I said, "No, they will be with After all, you are his son. Then what's the use of you. going away?" "It's true," he said. "See, my mother cooks well first of all. I don't know how to cook." One advantage he gave. Second advantage he said, "You see, my father scolds me if I do anything wrong. See, if I want to smoke, I cannot because I am frightened of my father. I won't smoke but if I am alone I may start smoking. You see, it's a very bad thing to be alone. It's very dangerous." The brain works the other way round. There is still a lot of innocence in our 99 country (said in There is still a lot of innocence in our country (said in Hindi). We are cunning as far as telling lies are concerned that also we don't do very well, I must say. We get caught (said in Hindi). Hindi).) We are cunning as far as Over here they are more honest towards the Government. They'll pay their taxes [said in Hindi]. It's regarded very sinful not to give tax. In India they know how to evade. They are very honest towards Government. To us, you see, it's better to be honest to God and nothing telling lies are concerned that also to the Government. we don't do very Sahaja Yogi : They are honest about money matters as well. well, I must say. We Shri Mataji : Maybe now, but initially it was not like that. Initially if money had been taken from someone [said in Hindi], if you have borrowed the money from somebody and you have not returned the money, then it was said that you will have to become a bull in next life and you will have to plough his fields, if you don't return the money. So people were quite frightened about the next birth problem, you see, but it's nowhere written in the shastras that if you cheat the Government there will be get caught (said in Hindi). any punishment and they say that, you see, this Government is today. Tomorrow somebody else will come. So what does it matter? By that time we are born again. So what? It's all right to cheat the Government. Sahaja Yogi : Bribery? 10

 Shri Mataji : Bribery happens a lot [said in Hindi] but that is at a different level. But bribery has come to us from the English. You'll be surprised. We never knew what was bribery. Going through the history you'll find Warren Hastings and all those people, they taught us. That time they started it, getting bribes and things. And because, you see, they had such an image they themselves created, they never felt that they were the servants of the public, never. So everybody used to give them bribes. They were like Raja, Maharaja (Nazrane chalte the pehele).... Robert Clive did. Hastings did ...I used to go into the annals of these people because my husband has been a collector [Hindi]. So we used to have their ancient things. So they used to take bribes. They taught us how to take bribes. But this Chinese traveler who came to India says that these people never locked their houses and all that. I mean, I remember that till I got married, my father's house was a huge house, was never locked, never! Neither the main door nor the back door, nothing, and only once we had a theft in our lifetime. The fellow came and took away our gramophone. So my father was very happy, you see. "He must be some connoisseur, you see. So it's good for him. He should have asked from me. I could have given him some records," he said. Thefts were lesser initially [Hindi]. But theft is much less. We don't steal things from people. You see, this is the thing is, you see. To each other we'll not try to cheat but to the Government we'll cheat because the Government is changing. So it doesn't matter. Doesn't matter cheating the – this is the psychology, I think. But a person they will never steal because if you steal from somebody's house that's a sin but cheating the Government is not a sin because the Government changes tomorrow. And the Government itselfis cheating. So what is a sin to cheat a cheat? But in Sahaja Yoga I was surprised, you see. Nobody makes a mess of money in Sahaja Yoga. At least in Maharashtra, you see, very honest people. Now you people also go there. Nobody will steal your things, nobody, because, you see, they don't want to cheat God. That's the thing. This double attitude is something really funny. You are saints. So they will not cheat you. They will not take away your things. I mean, many a times it has happened with Sahaja Yogis, they have left everything there and just walked off. They just got into their buses and went off. And people had to gather all their things and bring them but nothing was lost. So the feeling that saints should not be cheated is something great, really. First time when these people came, Australians, they had tied their money to a thing and this and that, just like as if someone wears the sacred thread [Hindi]. So I said, "What's this?" They said, "This is money and..."I said, "Why do all this? It's all right." And Kay, she was another, she was an air hostess at that time, she came and she came by taxi and that time they were staying in the flats for one day or so. They were in a flat and she just walked out, you see, without taking the luggage or anything and she went up and forgot that she has to take her luggage. The fellow waited there for half an hour. Then the taxi fellow went away. So then she remembered, "Oh, 99 God! I had all my luggage in the taxi. I have forgotten there." Everything, even her purse she had forgotten and so she informed the police. So the police said, "Yes, the taxi fellow is sitting here for long now. Will you please come and collect your luggage?" 11

 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India), 7 December 1988 Two Ways You Can Clear Out Your Left Side. 99 Sahaja Yogi : "Our ascent Mother." Shri Mataji : “What?" Sahaja Yogi : “Our ascent." Shri Mataji : “That's very general. 99 Sahaja Yogini : “Enjoy tapasyas." Shri Mataji : “Enjoy What?" Sahaja Yogini : “Tapas." Shri Mataji : Tapas! Is it any tapas in this? Doesn't seem to. No, no, no, no, no, no. We are all having a nice time I think. Tapasya doesn't mean this. Tapasya means you have to climb the Himalayas without any water, with dehydration getting thinner and thinner, no food, nothing, that is Tapasya. Or stand on your one foot for 12 years. Maharastra is the country where I Sahaja Yogini : “We are getting Joy." would say the Sahaja Yogi : “We enjoy collectivity." Shri Mataji : "That's one of them. Correct. That's one of them." 99 Ganesha Sahaja Yogini : “To be in thoughtless awareness all the time." 99 principle is very Shri Mataji : Yes. You see there are really many things about this Indian tour, specially of Maharastra. To begin with, Maharastra is the country where I would the Ganesha principle is very strong. Because there are 8 Ganeshas which have come out of the Mother Earth. And all the three powers are represented by the Mother Earth also here Mahakali, Maha Lakshmi, Maha Saraswati. So the whole strong. say place is very vibrated. And the Mother Earth is very much vibrated. Now, if you have any problem of Mooladara, for example, on this land if you sit down on the ground and put My photograph in front of you and put your left the hand towards the photograph and the right hand on the Mother Earth and say mantra of Shri Ganesha or Atharvasheersha your left side will be cured. Left side is cured means left swadistana first of all. So many of you have been to so many gurus, this, that and have done wrong things. That gets corrected. Also you have seen that in the west abortion is very common thing that happens to women. May be because of bad Mooladhara or may be by left Swadisthana. Whatever it is, we don't have to bother about the past or about reason why it is so? So if you take your vibrations on the left hand side, then you clear out your Mooladhara in such a 12

 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India), manner that the problems of Mooladhara are solved. That is very important for all of us. But this you can't do anywhere else, I think that good. I mean, you can, of course. Mother Earth is everywhere. But here it is a special place for Mooladara chakra. Where it clears you very much and fills you up with holiness and auspiciousness. These are the two qualities of Shri Ganesha which you can imbibe very easily in this place. So, try to sit on the ground as much as you can. And try to meditate with your left hand towards the Sun and right hand on the Mother Earth. Can you do that now? Let's see. Left hand towards the sun and right hand on the Mother Earth. [Pause] Better. Clears out. [Pause] So, instead of cleansing it through your Agnya you can cleanse it through your Mooladara. There are only two ways you can clear out your left side. Is, one is your Agya and another is Mooladara. This is the easiest thing to do here. your And you must have noticed that the people have very good Mooladhara in Maharastra. They have no problem of their Mooladhara. The way they dance, the way they become innocent. Are so innocent, [sort of looking as if some]. Gods have come down here. Moreover, this place is very vibrated otherwise also because lots of saints have lived here. Have left their vibrations and Shri Rama and Sita have walked on this soil bare feet. So it is a very vibrated place. See now, better! You see how the Mother Earth is sucking in. That's the reason why this tour has a big significance for all the western people. Because there have been quite a big attack on your innocence. And that has to be re established and we have to work it out. And it is a very serious attack. Now they are not only attacking the young people but even children are attacked. All the time the innocence is in danger. So, one has to become very rich in your innocence and in your holiness and very powerful, so that you can emit this holiness everywhere. We Are An International Religion Now, the second point is that we are an international religion. We don't belong to any country. None of us belong to any country. That we are not Italians, we are not Indians, we are not Australians. What we are? We are in the Kingdom of God. So, we are men of God as described by William Blake. So we are men of God and that we have no bondage to any of these ideas that we belong to this country or to that country. Once you understand this point in your collectivity, then you will expand. Not only you will expand but that expansion will give you a kind of confidence in yourself that we have to take the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga. It's alright, what I get in Sahaja Yoga, what I have achieved in Sahaja Yoga. What is my gain, personal gain in Sahaja Yoga? How I have cured chakras? This is one side of achievement. And the another side is taking the my responsibility. We have to spread Sahaja Yoga all over. So, the culture of Sahaja Yoga is to be 13

 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India), learnt. If we do not have that culture within us, then people are not going to listen to us. As it is, I see your faces shining. I mean, people see your faces and they say these are like lotuses. These people are blooming. So beautiful they are. But, apart from that, in your personality there should be that magnetism which expresses your responsibility which is the gravity part of it. As the Mother Earth has got gravity, she has got this power of gravity also. So, that gravity should be there within us. On the whole if you see Indians as they are they have many funny funny type of politicians and also we have lots of kinds of cunning people for ruling us. Because they are very simple people. Are extremely simple and very innocent. So, only the cunning can rule such people. And such cunning are exploiting these simple people here. But that doesn't mean that people are bad. They are too good and that's why anybody can come on this country and can rule us. In the same way now these all the muck of this place, all the rakshashas have now become politicians. And they are trying to rule this country and the poverty remains at the same level as poverty. There is no concern for the poor people really. Because they want even to just exploit that poverty for their own purpose. That whatever the situation, there is one thing for sure that these are very simple hearted, very open hearted, loving, affectionate people. And very generous. They have very little to give but whatever they have they want to give you. And this is specially in Maharastra. I see this culture is there. Even the poorest of poor will try to contribute something just to make you comfortable, without any grudging, without any grumbling. when we become innocent we should not judge be may ourselves that, if we are innocent we will be So, when we become innocent we should not judge ourselves that, if we are innocent we will be exploited. Nobody can exploit the saint. Nobody can. If you allow somebody, like I allow people to exploit Me, because I like to play about. They think they are exploiting Me. I say, “Alright, I know I am being exploited". exploited. Nobody can exploit the 66 So, that is also you should see that side where the humanity is preserved already, it is still preserved. They are not exposed to these ideas of advancement where you can overpower other people economically or politically or try to sort of dominate the whole world. Even economics can dominate. So, they have no sense of that. So, the humanity is still in the same innocent child like character. And they exist very well. They are not sick people. They are very healthy despite all kinds of mosquitoes and bugs and politicians. All sorts of parasites. But they still exist happily always laughing. saint. In the same way we have to understand that in Sahaj culture we are innocent people. We don't want to harm anyone. We don't want to trouble anyone. We are peaceful people and we are joyous people. We have to enjoy our own personality, and enjoy our collectivity. The sacrifices that we make here is practically nil I think, 14

 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India), but the gain is quite a lot, if you develop that witness state within yourself. And that is very, very easily developed in this country because there is no, no more any pressures, you see. Like a wheel moves very fast and the centre of the wheel is a quiet centre. If you are on your centre then you see the wheel moving you don't mind. But to immediately jump on to that center is difficult in the west I see. Because the pressures are too much. The Wheel is moving too fast and you cannot take your attention to the center of it, you see. But if you go to a quiet place where the pressures are not much of time or of any such bindings then gradually the attention moves to the center. That's why people go to the Himalayas where there is peace. In that peace you can reach your own peace better. And if you can establish that peace in your meditation here, then I am sure you can go back, to that fast moving wheel also and you will be on your center. So take the full advantage of this tour. Don't worry t0o much about other things other comforts that you have in the west. But think of the comfort of the heart, comfort of the mind. And that will really help you a lot. Here I would say you should walk about little bit, walking exercises. Go about explore little bit and see for yourself. This is the reason I am insisting on all these people that they don't want to stay in the city. Take them out of the city. This is a very good chance. Because in England even if you go outside, I mean, so cold, you can't just sit like this. Or it may start raining that you have to sit with an umbrella on your head like that. But this climate has given us this. This beautiful climate has given this country the possibility of developing inner being more than outer being. Because we don't have to fight the nature. The nature is so kind. You know you can live on a tree here. You don't have to fight to get to the stores for food. No. You can get here around something, eat it, live here. Fruits and some things are quite available. So the life becomes much easier here. And then people don't think of outside things. But they have to think about inner thing, just automatically, you see, when the life is simple. You enter inside and see for yourself because the enquiry starts, 'Why this life? Why am I here? What am I supposed to do?' That's why in the beginning I asked you the question, "Tell Me, what is the advantage of this tour?" But you jump in the sea, of the ocean of joy and you just forget every purpose of the visit. [Shri Mataji smiles] Greatest event of spiritual world Now the most important thing is that Sahaja Yoga is the greatest event of spiritual world, where all the cosmos, all the gods and goddesses and all the angels and incarnations and prophets, all are busy working it out within you and without. If you could easily reflect My brain back on some screen, you might be able to see them, all of them, sitting down there and working on it. We have some photographs like that. So, the whole of Virata is working behind the stage and you are on the stage. So one has to be very careful and alert that we do not divert our attention into something which is very mundane and very gross. We have to become subtler and subtler here. Because other pressures are not here. For example, now I lived in England and I know what it is than anywhere else. There are no servants. There is nobody to look after you. Early in the morning whether you are old or young you have to make your own tea. You have to clean your kitchen. You 15

 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India), have to do all the work all the time. That's why I think people don't want to have homes also there. Because if you have a home then you have to do all this nonsense. So, they live in the homes somehow for 5 days and then run away for two days somewhere in a hotel or some place. But here it is very comfortable. You don't have to do any washing, nothing. Now for example, if you have to run your own restaurant you have to work very hard. Here somebody is running for you, you are not doing anything so there is no tapasya too. But in this all enjoyment and everything that you see, as you see these trees it looks so nice and happy. But behind that is a great movement of their roots down going towards the source of life. That is what I would say today, that you must meditate every morning whenever it is possible for you. Of course, the sleep is much less for you but you can sleep in the buses. I have seen you all were dozing off [Shri Mataji laughs]. I am not surprised because you must all be very tired. And I am also with you all the time and perhaps, I do much more than you can do because you may sleep at 2'0 clock but I have to sleep at 5'0 clock. There is a three hours difference between you and me. But, despite that you can feel very fresh if you can really meditate. It is like a bath. In your innocence, in your beautiful personality and the whole of tiredness and pressures vanish. Even the dancing is a very good way of clearing out your pressures. Because in the dance you go into thoughtless awareness and also in the joy. The joy is so fulfilling that the joy of spirit is much more than the joy of any worldly comforts or also of physical comforts. It gives you physical comfort. It gives you mental comfort and it gives you also the spiritual comfort. So, try to be more a witness, detached from yourself, watching everything. you can feel very fresh if you can really meditate. It is like a bath. In your innocence, in your beautiful personality and the whole of This is the purpose of our tour here, you, to understand each other from all the countries we have come here. We are all of the same Mother. We are all brothers and sisters and we are here to enjoy each others company. Then there are other Indians. Also you must talk to them. See how they are cooking. The ladies should go and help them if possible. Let's have if we can do some vegetables for you. Or, they now are tying up a... say a pandal here you can all go and help them and just become one with them. You should not think that you are guests all the time. Of course, you are. They would not like you to do it though, they think you are all guests, special guests. And even if you do little bit, even if you would like to carry my cup back, they would say, "No, no, no, we will." So that is the idea, Indian idea of a guest is. But, let's have our western idea little bit about guests. Where the guests have to pay for everything. And do all the household work also. So, the whole working of Sahaja Yoga becomes easier and very much enjoyable, if you take responsibilities. And have a rapport with the organizers here. It is so, I tiredness and pressures vanish. I would say 99 16

 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India), would say the leaders should meet the organizers when they come here. There are many little, little things they were asking Me that, how are they going to do for their washings and what are we going to do? What is the date we should appoint for their washing? So, all these things must be talked over and a rapport must be established about all the problems you have and what we can do, about say our movements, where we have to go and how we can organize it and how we can help it. So there is a Sort of proper intermingling and coordination and a rapport between you people and the organizers here so that there is minimum trouble for you and minimum trouble for them. For example, yesterday it was, I told that there will be a man waiting at 'Veeru', that is what you call the Ellora caves. But you had no time to go to Ellora. But just on the way if you had started. Three people we had put there at the station as soon as the buses come here bring them directly. But you had to spend one hour going that way and one hour coming back. So, you can imagine two hours you would have saved yesterday nicely. But, doesn't matter, it has to happen, has to happen. Moreover, when you are going to a place, you are carrying vibrations everywhere. You are giving your vibrations. And when the people see you specially the Indians half baked intellectuals when they see you, they start thinking that we are still half baked, how is it these people have taken to Sahaja Yoga and we are still sitting on our foolish ego thinking that we know much more than anybody else. That has also a very good effect. The way you sang Marathi songs the other day, it really created a great impress on the people. Now, tonight again there is a public program. I will be busy with the press and all sorts of things. But, you go and enjoy your bath and your swimming in that lake which is nearby here. But don't go too far because may be in the center, it has rained so much so they were saying about 55 feet is alright, but, may be there might be lot of mire in the center of that lake. So, better keep to the what you call the shores of it. Not too far and you can have a nice bath there. Enjoy your bath and you come back here and have your lunch. But one thing you have to remember is that Indians are very happy if you eat well. If you don't eat well, they think that they have not made the food well. And that's what they were all the time asking, "We hope they have liked the food, we hope they have liked the food."I said, "They are all right. Put less chilies, that's all." But little chilies are very good, Because of Your constipation. I think little chilies will help you because normally people get constipation if you don't take chilies. Indians never suffer from this disease because, they have always a little chilies in their food. Little chilies, is alright. You can develop a little taste for chilies, is alright. It cleanses you and it has vitamin C also in it. So, it is quite good for colds and other things. Now, anybody who wants to drink water should take it from the proper places and on the way if you feel thirsty you should take your own water of course, but apart from that if you need you can just take aerated water. Because it's rained so much that water has got very polluted. So, don't drink any water anywhere unless and until you are sure about it. The rest of the food is all done well. So, there is nothing to worry. But, don't buy anything on the road or anything and eat them. Just whatever is cooked for you I think should be sufficient and enjoy that so that your stomach is kept well and you enjoy the best of your health. So, May God bless you all. 17

 कि शु निराकार-साकार स्वरूप परम पूज्या श्रीनिर्मला माँ भगवती आदिशक्ति का महामाया रूप हैं। स्वयं परमेश्वरी माँ साकार रूप में पृथ्वी पर अवतरित हुई, उनके शरीर में समस्त देवी-देवताओं का वास है। ४ मार्च १९७९ सिं्ककक 1525

 निराकार-साकार स्वरूप साकार रुप में विभिन्न देवी - देवताओं की मूर्तियों की पूजा करने की भी विशेष विधि होती है। इनमें प्राणप्रतिष्ठा की जाती है तब इन्हें मंदिरों में स्थापित करते हैं। पूजा में जल, चंदन, रोली, अक्षत, नैवेद्य पुष्प ( भोग) दीप और धूप इन अष्ट पदार्थों को श्रद्धा भाव से देव प्रतिमा को अर्पण किया जाता है। परम पूज्या श्री निर्मला माँ भगवती आदिशक्ति का महामाया रुप हैं। स्वयं परमेश्वरी माँ साकार रुप में पृथ्वी पर अवतरित हुई, उनके शरीर में समस्त देवी- देवताओं का वास है। हम सहजियों को परमेश्वरी माँ के साक्षात स्वरुप की पूजा का सौभाग्य प्राप्त हुआ है। पूज्य श्री माँ की पूजा-अर्चन द्वारा समस्त देवी शक्तियों की आराधना हो जाती है। श्री माँ ने स्वयं हमें पूजा विधि बताई है। पू० माँ के चित्र महत्त्वपूर्ण है हम सहजी श्रद्धापूर्वक उसकी पूजा करते हैं । परमपूज्य श्रीमाताजी ने हमें इस विषय में बहुत विस्तार से समझाया है। सनातन धर्म और आर्य धर्म आदि में सदियों से झगड़े चले आ रहे हैं।... अब निराकार साकार की बात थोड़ी सी समझा दें, तो ये झगड़े खत्म हो जाएँगे। जिस वक्त हमारी पिंगला नाड़ी बनायी गयी... हमारे राइट साइड में उस वक्त ये पाँच तत्त्व जो थे, वायु, उनकी जाग्रत करने की बात थी। आप पाँच तत्त्व जानते हैं जिससे सारी सृष्टि बनायी गयी (आकाश, अग्नि, पृथ्वी और जल)। इनको जाग्रत करना था इसलिये यज्ञ वरगैरह हमारे वेदों में किये गए, स्मृतियाँ पढ़ी गयी हैं। यज्ञों में, ये पाँच तत्त्व हैं इसको जाग्रत किया गया| ये पाँच तत्त्व जाग्रत करना जरूरी चीज है। अग्नि को जाग्रत करना था, पानी को जाग्रत करना था क्योंकि इनकी जागृति के कारण ही मनुष्य इनका इस्तेमाल कर सकता था। उसके बाद ही खेती बाड़ी शुरु हुयी। आज का साइन्स भी इसी वजह से मनुष्य के समझ में आया। अगर हमारी पिंगला नाड़ी जाग्रत न होती तो हम कभी भी साइन्स न सोच पाते ना हम यह समझ पाते कि पाँच तत्त्वों को हम किस तरह इस्तेमाल करें । बिजली कैसे बनाए और किस तरह से हम इस अग्नि का इस्तेमाल करे, अग्नि तक का हमें पता न था, हम अग्नि भी न बना पाते। ये सब हम बना सके इसलिए राइट साइड की पूजा होती है। इसलिए यज्ञ होते रहे और निराकार में जो ये पाँच शक्तियाँ हैं तो निराकार ही पूजा होती रही उस ज़माने में। 19

 निराकार-साकार स्वरूप लेकिन उस में जब आगे लोगों ने सोचा कि जागृत कर लिया, अब आगे क्या? तो फिर मनन की चीज शुरु हुई। तब फिर सेंट्रल पथ पर आ गए। जब सेन्ट्रल पथ पर सुषुम्ना नाड़ी पर चढ़नी शुरु हुई तो उन्हें दिखाई देने लगा कि ये देवी-देवता इस जगह पर बैठे हुए हैं। ये जो पाँच तत्त्व बने हैं इन्हीं से इन चक्रों की बाडीज़ भी बनी हैं। इनकी जो शरीर रचना है वो तो इन्हीं पाँच तत्त्वों से बनी है। तो जब इन्होंने इन तत्त्वों को जानना शुरु किया तो देखा कि इनके देवता हैं, तब इन्होंने मनन विधि में उन देवताओं को जानना शुरु एक के बाद एक, एक के बाद एक। तब इन्होंने कहना शुरु कर दिया किया। कि यह साकार भी है तो निराकार से साकार पर लोग उतरने लग गए। जैसे-जैसे चेतना बढ़ती गयी वैसे वैसे लोग आने लग गए। उसके बाद साकार पर जो आ गए... तो इसकी पूजा कर उसकी पूजा कर, Ritualism आ गया अंधश्रद्धा आ गयी, धर्मान्धता आ गई, बड़ा बुरा हाल हो गया। तब से एक बड़ा भारी आन्दोलन हुआ, इतना ही नहीं मोहम्मद साहब जैसे लोग संसार में पैदा हुए, क्राइस्ट संसार में आए। इन्होंने सबसे कहा कि निराकार ही ठीक है, साकार को खत्म करो। हांलाकि बड़ा गोपनीय है ये सब कुछ इतना बाईबल में लिखा हुआ है, जो कुछ पृथ्वी ने बनाया हुआ है और जो कुछ आकाश ने बनाया है उसका प्रतिरुप तो बनाइये, ये बड़ी मार्मिक चीज़ है । इसको एक ईसाई लोग समझें तो समझ लें कि मूर्ति पूजा क्या है? अब पृथ्वी ने कौन सी चीज़, बनायी है? उसकी प्रतिरुप कर के उसकी पूजा नहीं करना चाहिए।... जितने स्वयंभू लिंग हैं ये पृथ्वी ने स्वयं बनाए हैं, और इसके प्रतिरुप आपने जो बनाए भी वो पूजनीय होता ही नहीं क्योंकि वह imperfect है। इसका भी co - efficent होता है, इस आकार का भी Co-efficent होता है। उस आकार के कारण ही चैतन्य बहता है। और हू-बहू वैसा आकार बनाना असम्भव है और जो बनाता है वो भी realized soul होना चाहिए और वो उसे बेचना नहीं चाहिए उसको। इसलिए जितने भी मूर्तियों की हम पूजा करते हैं, अधिकतर इस हिसाब से जीरों हैं... इसलिए मूर्ति पूजा का खण्डन है। अब काबा के अन्दर जो पत्थर है वो साक्षात शिवलिंग है। पृथ्वी से निकला हुआ शिवलिंग है वो। उसे मोहम्मद साहब जानते थे और जितने भी शिवलिंग हैं वो साक्षात है जिसको देखिए वही उसकी मूर्ति बना ले, मिट्टी बना ले, पत्थर का बना ले, ये बनाने की इजाजत नहीं है। इसकी मूर्ति पूजा वर्जित है , इसलिए मूर्तिपूजा बाधक है। ...ऐसी मूर्तियों की पूजा नहीं होनी चाहिए साकार परमात्मा नहीं होते, यह कहना बहुत गुलत बात है। इसका मतलब यह है आपने वन साइडेडनेस ले ली। समझ लीजिए हम आपसे कहें कि शहद को खोज लाएँ तो हम आपसे पहले फूलों का वर्णन करें कि 20

 फूल ऐसा होना चाहिए, वैसा फूल मिलेगा, उन में से शहद ले आइए । आप गए और देख के चले आए कि हाँ भई फूल मिल गया। अब फूलों की ही पूजा करने लग गए । इससे शहद आपको नहीं मिलेगा। बातचीत से शहद नहीं मिल सकता। सिर्फ फूलों की बातचीत होती रही... शहद नहीं मिलता बातचीत से ... तो उन्होंने कहा शहद की बात करते हैं, तो दूसरी बात शुरु कर दी निराकार की वो भी बातचीत तो बातचीत ही रह गयी दिमागी ज़मा खर्च आप चाहे शहद की बात करो, चाहे फूल की बात करो, आपको शहद नहीं मिल सकता जब तक आप स्वयं मधुकर न हो जाए। जब तक आप स्वयं ही मधु को पाने के योग्य न हो जाएँ तब तक आपको शहद नहीं मिल सकता। फूल भी जुरूरी है और शहद भी जुरूरी है और शहद पाने के लिए आपका वो होना जुरूरी है जिसे मधुकर कहते हैं । अब उस जूमाने में या पिछले जमाने में जब हम अपने पाँच तत्त्वों को प्रबुद्ध कर रहे थे (निराकार) उस चीज़ को लेकर आज झगड़ा करने की कोई ज़रूरत नहीं। वह भी सही था और यह भी सही है, बिल्कुल सही है कि परमेश्वर अवतार के रूप में संसार में आकर मनुष्य का उद्धार करते हैं- यह भी बिल्कुल सनातन बात है और यज्ञ करना भी सनातन बात है जिसके कारण आप थे पाँच elements हैं अपने अन्दर में उनकी शुद्धि करें क्योंकि जब आपके चक्र शुद्ध नहीं हुए तो मेरा कहना भी व्यर्थ है । वो भी जरूरी चीज़ है और आत्मा को जानना भी जुरूरी चीज है। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 4 मार्च 1979, देहरादून अपने हृदय को स्वच्छ करने के लिए हवन का विधान है - ललिता पंचमी" पूजा - ललित का मतलब है सुन्दर, अति सुंदर, गौरी जी का नाम है। कल गणेश जी का जन्म हुआ है इसलिये आज "ललिता पंचमी'" को गौरी जी का दिन मनाया जाता है। वैसे भी आप जानते १। हैं कि मेरी कुण्डलिनी माने कुण्डलिनी का नाम ललिता है। लालित्य सौन्दर्य को कहते हैं, मुनष्य वही सुन्दर होता है जिसमें sense of gratitude (उपकार बुद्धि) होती है। जिस इन्सान में sense of gratitude जरा भी न वह इन्सान पशुवत है.. कैसी अजीब चीज़ है कि इंसान अपने से इस तरह compromise कर लेता है, वो अपने अन्दर का जो लालित्य है उसे भी नहीं पहचानता और अपने अंदर जो अग्लीनेस ugliness हैं उसके साथ रहता है हरदम... आपके अंदर जो गंदे तत्त्व हैं उन पर आप जी रहे हैं, उसे हम लोग भूत कहें, बाधा कहें कुछ भी कहें। ये आदत लग जानी चाहिए हमारे अंदर, सब सहजयोगियों के अंदर कि हमारी गंदगी की हम सफाई करें। आज बड़ा शुभ दिन है ...आज श्री गणेश का स्मरण कर के हम लोग हवन करेंगे, अपने हवन को .... ... पूरी तरह से सम्पन्न करेंगे। ...मुझे आशा है कि इस यज्ञ से इस हवन से हम लोगों के हृदय स्वच्छ हो जाएंगे और हमारी उत्क्रांति में बहुत मदद मिलेगी। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 5.2.76 , बंबई 21 the

 प्रचलित धार्मिक अनुष्ठानों के मूल तत्व जीवन में कुछ घटनाएं होनी होती हैं, जीवन ऐसा ही है। किसी की मृत्यु होनी होती है, सभी लोग एक साथ तो मरते नहीं। जो भी जन्मा है उसकी मृत्यु होनी ही है। न जाने क्यों लोगों ने मृत्यु को इतना महत्त्व दे दिया है। यह भी केवल एक क्षण है जिससे व्यक्ति गुजर जाता है और कपड़े बदल कर वापिस आ जाता है।" "हिन्दुस्तान की अपनी बहुत अच्छी परम्पराएँ हैं पर कुछ चली आती हुई गलत परम्परायें भी हैं... उनको ११ हमने ज्यादा जकड़ लिया है बनिस्बत उनके जो सही है। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, फरवरी 1981 'कर्मकाण्ड बहुत अधिक है। हिन्दू धर्म में कर्मकांडो का बाहुल्य है। आप दाँए बैठे, बाँए को बैठे, इस समय ये कार्य करें तथा अन्य बहुत सी चीजें। आपकी बहन की मृत्यु होने पर कितने दिन रहना है और भूखा पति की मृत्यु पर कितने दिन? जो चला गया वो चला गया समाप्त। शरीर समाप्त हो जाता है तो आपका इतने दिनों व्रत करना बिल्कुल गलत है। व्रत करने से हो सकता है आपके अंदर भूत प्रवेश कर जाएं। मैं तो ये कहूँगी कि इन कर्मकाण्डो का सृजन करने वाले लोग... अत्यन्त भौतिक एवं अर्थहीन जीवन व्यतीत करते हैं । प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 23.4.2000 टर्की इस कदर दकियानूसीपना अपने देश में इस कदर अंधापन है इस मामले में... ब्राह्मणाचार और स्त्रियाचार कहते हैं कि इस तरह हम लोग ढँक गए हैं कि छोटी-छोटी बातों में नाराज़ हो जाते हैं। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, फरवरी 1981 हमारी जकड़ जो है वो है अन्ध श्रद्धाएँ। किसी भी चीज़ में हमने विश्वास कर लिया तो वह परमविश्वास हो जाता है... वही मन्दिरों के चक्कर, वही मस्जिदो के चक्कर, वही गुरुद्वारे के चक्कर। अरे भई अस्पताल में जाने से आप ठीक हो जाएगें? दवाई का नुस्खा पढ़ने से आप ठीक हो जाएँगे क्या?? दवा लीजिए दवा- "कहे ११ नानक बिन आपा चीन्हें मिटे न भ्रम की काई" बस पढ़ते जाओ उससे क्या भ्रम मिट जाएगा? कोई बाइबिल पढ़ रहा है, उधर कोई कुरान पढ़ रहा है, उधर ग्रंथ साहब पढ़ रहे हैं, कोई कुछ पढ़ रहा है, कुछ खोपड़ी में तो जाता ही नहीं क्यांकि आपके अन्दर आत्मा का जागरण ही नहीं हुआ। आत्मा की जाग्रति के बाद धर्म आत्मसात होता है।.. इस शक्ति को हमें प्राप्त करना है... सिर्फ कुंडलिनी जागरण मात्र करना है।" प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 23.3.92 , दिल्ली हम भारतीय लोगों के साथ एक समस्या है कि हम बंधनों में जकड़े हुए हैं। हमारे सम्मुख इतने आदर्शों के होते हुए भी हम ऊपर नहीं उठ पाते।... हमें समझना चाहिए कि सभी महान अवतरण, पीर और पैगम्बर इस जीवन वृक्ष को पोषित करने के लिए आए... आपको इस सबमें विश्वास करना होगा। कुंडलिनी जाग्रति विकास की जीवन्त क्रिया है- अन्तिम उपलब्धि। प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 6.12.91 मद्रास, खण्ड IV, 1995 22

 Published & Printed by Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd. 10, Bhagyachintamani Co-op. Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud, Pune, Maharashtra, India 411 038. Ph.: 020 - 65226031, 65226032, 25286537 email:sale@nitl.oc.in, website:www.nitl.co.in (For queries contact on above address)

 The birthday of Your Mother, and all such celebrations have a very deep significance, because on such occasions, special vibrations flow in the atmosphere. When all the celestial bodies, the Eternal Personalities, Gods and Goddesses, sing the praise, and that's how the whole atmosphere is filled with mirth and happiness. H.H.Shri Mataji, 23.03.1980.



----------------------

2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-0.txt 
 YUVA दृष्टि
Jan.-Mar.2014
ITA
Some have tremendous powers of prayers...just by praying they have saved
the lives of many people. Your powers are based on love and compassion,
and you have to use your powers for the benevolence of the people.
(21-06-1992)
THE
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-1.txt 
 Inside
This Issue
Attention should be on collective things ...4
Conversation about Chastity ...9
Conversation with yogis ...12
निराकार-साकार स्वरूप...१८
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-3.txt 
 24 April 1994
Attention
should be on collective things....
оп со
So liver should be treated. And next time when you
come to India we are going to get you all the medicines of
liver. If they are very fat then they are left sided. Try to bring
them to the center with the three candle treatment. But first
of all test it what is the situation. Sometime they developed
the puffy fat that is alright. They will become alright. That is
how
should look after their health. Then also look after
you
their behavior. Tell them how to behave. So I have seen in
west the children are not properly brought up because
parents neglect them. I won't blame the children. Parents
neglect them it should be loving, kind and at the same time
should must tell them what is discipline is. It is very
important.
you
Then Keep a watch on them. How they are? What they
are doing? Of course we have school but it has limited seats
there. Whatever it is, they are going to adjust as a many as
possible. Even then supposing you have any problem, do
not go arbitrarily in to it. You may ask your leader or you
may write to me and inform me. Among you somebody
might become very ego oriented, may start his own
organization, I will do this. Let him say you get out and he
will suffer. You do not have to worry. Alright you get out.
Anybody who is arbitrary will not work out. Suppose one
finger starts working more than other means it is cancer that
is malignancy. We can not have malignancy. All of you
should work together with understanding, before others as
well among yourselves. It is very important to understand.
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-5.txt 
 Now, Sahaja-yoga has worked out in so many countries. In such a big way in some and in such a
small way in some. But wherever, Sahajayogi have to be something special. Even the Children have
to be something special. You have any other problems which you do not want to discuss, you discuss
it your leader and then you can write to me directly, no harm. Either If I answer well and good and if I
do not answer also well and good, it will work out. But attention should not be all the time about
yourself. Me, my family, my children, my house, my job, No. As soon as your attention goes on
another people, it works fast. It helps, very much. But on your self, I am sick; I have this problem that
problem, nothing. You are now at the stage when you can absolutely solve all the problem but first
and foremost thing is if your attention is on yourself then it won't work out. Attention should be on
others. And if it has to be on yourself, attention then just find what is wrong with me. But some people
in that also go too far. Mother my Agyna is catching, Mother my this is caching, it is nonsense. May
be you are catching from other people, its possible.
There are some nice books, now already in Sahajayoga translated in Chinese luckily and also
my tapes could be translated also. But you have to keep my voice as I told you because that is mantra,
isn't it? And you can have subtitle, it would be better if you could do it. That is a very good idea that
you can have subtitles, really. Specially, for Russian if they could do in Russia.
Now if you have any question you can ask me.
So it should be always like, ifyou are Chinese, then you should not only deal with Chinese. They
should all come to the collective. Supposing you are Indians, you should not only deal with the
Indians, but they should come to the collective. Because unless and until they come to the collective
they will not know what the problem is? It is not that you can organize separately a group, another
group separately. It has to be one group. Of course you could have two ashrams or three ashrams,
makes no difference.
Any other question?
Sahajayogi : is the Camphor treatment is for left side?
Shri Mataji : What?
Sahajayogi : camphor treatment? The Camphor treatment?
Shri Mataji : What?
Sahajayogi : he is asking if the camphor treatment is good for left side.
Shri Mataji: what?
Shri Mataji : No no no no. No need. Camphor, only once in a while. Do not do camphor. But you
have done all mixed up thing, you see. Just do left side treatment and you will be alright, just mixed
up. And you can not earn money on the name of GOD or divine work that is one thing. You can not
organize like that. No Never. Because once you start getting like this left sided Bhoot will come into
it. That is the part of Sahajayog. We can not. Also if you have any guru's photograph and all that it is
better to put them in the sea. Because this keeping any photograph, any book about them creates
problems. So religiously search out and put them in the sea.
[Shri Mataji looked at something]
"No no no no no no no"." No no no" Don't do all that. They will work on the photograph. If you
6.
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-6.txt 
 want to help somebody, you see some other people who have come, who want to raise, do not touch
them. Take a bandhan yourself and give them a bandhan. Put them before the photograph and you just
raise the Kundalini. But be careful. Because you are still, you see, not that sort of thing that you
cannot catch. You Might catch. So Among yourselves also you should not do that. Do not touch. If
somebody says I have this problem alright. Put him on the photograph. Take a bandhan yourself. Ask
them to take a bandhan. You also give a bandhan and then raise the Kundalini. Be careful. Even if
there is somebody who has came now, who is sick man. So you can give them a photograph, it is
alright if they are willing to do it. But somebody in his family is willing to take Sahajayoga, who is a
healthy person he should bring. Otherwise don't get after sick person. You will have many sick, in
thousands, to begin with. Do not worry about sick. If they are sick tell them to take the photograph
and work it out if they are left sided or right sided. Then the faith grows it improves. But you do not
touch the sick. No no. Not at all. You are not here to cure sick. But we are here to give realisation. May
God bless you.
Sahajayogi : For technique, if you have a problem on one side, you have balance in left side is
weak [Not clear], Do you raise Kundalini on this side and give bandhan to the other side.
Shri Mataji : Supposing you are right sided then you have to put down the right side, remember
that way it is much much better. Then you raise your left side and put on right side if you have right
side problem. If you have left side problem so you have to put down the left side. It is easier to
remember this way. So there is no confusion. But tying of Kundalini should be done after
moved out left to right or right to left, which ever way and then raise your Kundalini and tie up and
take a bandhan, it is the best way.
have
you
I would request you all of you to take photograph of yours and make an album, write it down
below that what is your name, date of birth and of self realisation. Send it over to me because I go on
seeing that sometimes. So, I know you better and also I will allow my attention on you, of children
and as well as of bigger people.
So I will talk to you and talk to him because you have little individual problem, both of you. So
what about you? Are you reconcile? Ha? ..I am going to get her. [Not clear] He came here to do
Sahajayoga and not to disturb a family. He is been very wrong. I am going to be very angry with him.
He is an old Sahajayogi, he should have behaved himself. [Not clear] You have such sweet beautiful
children. I will never support you in nonsense, i must tell you. And your husband is very good man
and if you behave alright he will come round to Sahajayoga. I am sure. You can not be a Sahajayogi if
you have no dharma, "Shield". As Buddha has called. As we called. As the Your character, your
morality is the most important in Sahajayoga. If you are not moral it has no meaning at all. What you
need is morality. This is happening everywhere, nonsense. We have to imbibe it in ourselves and we
have to generate it for others also. Whole world is full of immoral people. Very very few who are
standing for morality? It was the greatest ornament we have, Alright? Don't go after. This will never
help you? It was very wrong of you and also for your children. Now go back and behave yourself
properly otherwise you cannot be in Sahajayoga. Ha, If there is something wrong then it is alright. We
have divorce in Sahajayoga. We allow divorce in Sahajayoga. But there should be substantial reason
for that. "Or to sub thik hai". What we do?
May God Bless you all.
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-7.txt 
 Once you know the
Опcе
Mooladhara is so
important for
everything, even for
тaterial gain, pеоple
will start to look after
the Mooladhara.
8
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-8.txt 
 Conversation about Chastity
9 September 1986
One thing is Mooladhara is good. Indians have one advantage; they have a good
Mooladhara, you see. Eyes are good. That's what Salim was telling me that they do everything
that [sounds like: Sagaricles] are doing are doing but not chastity. That part they don't
compromise. Naturally, the attention is good.
Once you know the Mooladhara is so important for everything, even for material gain,
people will start to look after the Mooladhara. But logically you can see, it's very logical that if
your Mooladhara is all right, you have a nice family life, you have good children, they become
obedient, your attention is concentrated, whatever you work you grow, you do it with
concentration. There's no diversion. There's no – sort of, nobody can befool you because your
Mooladhara is all right.
Any girl who is good-looking can come and entice you, murder you, take away all your
money. Or the other way round. Could be anything. I mean, you are solidly placed if you have a
nice Mooladhara. You may go anywhere. Nobody can cheat you.
In India it's too much a strong feeling from tradition, I think. In our country we had three
thousand women burnt themselves on a fire – 'Jauhara' because the Muslims had won the battle
and they would enter into the fort. So they burnt themselves up. Very common in Bombay also.
So many cases where women jumped sixteen stories to save their chastity. For innately it's built
in us this Mooladhara is very important. That's our property. That's our power. Mooladhara you
save. They will cheat the Government, all right, very well. They are very good at cheating
Government, tell lies, do what you like, but as far as Mooladhara is concerned there they are; as
long as Mooladhara is all right.
Even men now, men have a great sense of chastity in India. Of course, westernized men
may not be. They are very innocent. They cannot see many things that you people can do like I
saw Kharde. It doesn't enter his head. He doesn't understand. Same with Me. Why should I
laugh at him? I am just saying, but at least I am better than him. Now I understand little bit but
Mr Kharde is absolutely an innocent person, you know, very innocent man. He said, “But why
do they do it? But why?" They can't explain that why people do it.
9.
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-9.txt 
 The questions are like this one mister ... he was quite
young. He came to me. He said, "Why do young people in
the west leave their parents? Supposing I leave my
parents, will their bhoots leave me"? He asked, "Will the
bhoots of my parents leave me"? I said, "No, they will be
with
After all, you are his son. Then what's the use of
you.
going away?" "It's true," he said. "See, my mother cooks
well first of all. I don't know how to cook." One advantage
he gave. Second advantage he said, "You see, my father
scolds me if I do anything wrong. See, if I want to smoke, I
cannot because I am frightened of my father. I won't
smoke but if I am alone I may start smoking. You see, it's a
very bad thing to be alone. It's very dangerous." The brain
works the other way round.
There is still a lot of
innocence in our
99
country (said in
There is still a lot of innocence in our country (said in
Hindi). We are cunning as far as telling lies are concerned
that also we don't do very well, I must say. We get caught
(said in Hindi).
Hindi).) We are
cunning as far as
Over here they are more honest towards the
Government. They'll pay their taxes [said in Hindi]. It's
regarded very sinful not to give tax. In India they know
how to evade. They are very honest towards Government.
To us, you see, it's better to be honest to God and nothing
telling lies are
concerned that also
to the Government.
we don't do very
Sahaja Yogi : They are honest about money matters
as well.
well, I must say. We
Shri Mataji : Maybe now, but initially it was not like
that. Initially if money had been taken from someone
[said in Hindi], if you have borrowed the money from
somebody and you have not returned the money, then it
was said that you will have to become a bull in next life
and you will have to plough his fields, if you don't return
the money. So people were quite frightened about the next
birth problem, you see, but it's nowhere written in the
shastras that if you cheat the Government there will be
get caught (said in
Hindi).
any punishment and they say that, you see, this
Government is today. Tomorrow somebody else will
come. So what does it matter? By that time we are born
again. So what? It's all right to cheat the Government.
Sahaja Yogi : Bribery?
10
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-10.txt 
 Shri Mataji : Bribery happens a lot [said in Hindi] but that is at a different level. But
bribery has come to us from the English. You'll be surprised. We never knew what was bribery.
Going through the history you'll find Warren Hastings and all those people, they taught us. That
time they started it, getting bribes and things. And because, you see, they had such an image
they themselves created, they never felt that they were the servants of the public, never. So
everybody used to give them bribes. They were like Raja, Maharaja (Nazrane chalte the
pehele).... Robert Clive did. Hastings did ...I used to go into the annals of these people
because my husband has been a collector [Hindi]. So we used to have their ancient things. So
they used to take bribes. They taught us how to take bribes.
But this Chinese traveler who came to India says that these people never locked their
houses and all that. I mean, I remember that till I got married, my father's house was a huge
house, was never locked, never! Neither the main door nor the back door, nothing, and only
once we had a theft in our lifetime. The fellow came and took away our gramophone. So my
father was very happy, you see. "He must be some connoisseur, you see. So it's good for him.
He should have asked from me. I could have given him some records," he said. Thefts were
lesser initially [Hindi]. But theft is much less. We don't steal things from people. You see, this is
the thing is, you see. To each other we'll not try to cheat but to the Government we'll cheat
because the Government is changing. So it doesn't matter. Doesn't matter cheating the – this is
the psychology, I think. But a person they will never steal because if you steal from somebody's
house that's a sin but cheating the Government is not a sin because the Government changes
tomorrow. And the Government itselfis cheating. So what is a sin to cheat a cheat?
But in Sahaja Yoga I was surprised, you see. Nobody makes a mess of money in Sahaja
Yoga. At least in Maharashtra, you see, very honest people. Now you people also go there.
Nobody will steal your things, nobody, because, you see, they don't want to cheat God. That's
the thing. This double attitude is something really funny. You are saints. So they will not cheat
you. They will not take away your things. I mean, many a times it has happened with Sahaja
Yogis, they have left everything there and just walked off. They just got into their buses and
went off. And people had to gather all their things and bring them but nothing was lost.
So the feeling that saints should not be cheated is something great, really. First time when
these people came, Australians, they had tied their money to a thing and this and that, just like
as if someone wears the sacred thread [Hindi]. So I said, "What's this?" They said, "This is
money and..."I said, "Why do all this? It's all right." And Kay, she was another, she was an air
hostess at that time, she came and she came by taxi and that time they were staying in the flats
for one day or so. They were in a flat and she just walked out, you see, without taking the
luggage or anything and she went up and forgot that she has to take her luggage. The fellow
waited there for half an hour. Then the taxi fellow went away. So then she remembered, "Oh,
99
God! I had all my luggage in the taxi. I have forgotten there." Everything, even her purse she
had forgotten and so she informed the police. So the police said, "Yes, the taxi fellow is sitting
here for long now. Will you please come and collect your luggage?"
11
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-11.txt 
 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India),
7 December 1988
Two Ways You Can Clear Out Your Left Side.
99
Sahaja Yogi : "Our ascent Mother."
Shri Mataji : “What?"
Sahaja Yogi : “Our ascent."
Shri Mataji : “That's very general.
99
Sahaja Yogini : “Enjoy tapasyas."
Shri Mataji : “Enjoy What?"
Sahaja Yogini : “Tapas."
Shri Mataji : Tapas! Is it any tapas in this? Doesn't seem to. No, no, no, no, no,
no. We are all having a nice time I think. Tapasya doesn't mean this. Tapasya means
you have to climb the Himalayas without any water, with dehydration getting
thinner and thinner, no food, nothing, that is Tapasya. Or stand on your one foot for
12 years.
Maharastra is the
country where I
Sahaja Yogini : “We are getting Joy."
would say the
Sahaja Yogi : “We enjoy collectivity."
Shri Mataji : "That's one of them. Correct. That's one of them."
99
Ganesha
Sahaja Yogini : “To be in thoughtless awareness all the time."
99
principle is very
Shri Mataji : Yes. You see there are really many things about this Indian tour,
specially of Maharastra. To begin with, Maharastra is the country where I would
the Ganesha principle is very strong. Because there are 8 Ganeshas which have
come out of the Mother Earth. And all the three powers are represented by the
Mother Earth also here Mahakali, Maha Lakshmi, Maha Saraswati. So the whole
strong.
say
place is very vibrated. And the Mother Earth is very much vibrated.
Now, if you have any problem of Mooladara, for example, on this land if you
sit down on the ground and put My photograph in front of you and put your left
the
hand towards the photograph and the right hand on the Mother Earth and
say
mantra of Shri Ganesha or Atharvasheersha your left side will be cured. Left side is
cured means left swadistana first of all. So many of you have been to so many
gurus, this, that and have done wrong things. That gets corrected. Also you have
seen that in the west abortion is very common thing that happens to women. May be
because of bad Mooladhara or may be by left Swadisthana. Whatever it is, we don't
have to bother about the past or about reason why it is so? So if you take your
vibrations on the left hand side, then you clear out your Mooladhara in such a
12
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-12.txt 
 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India),
manner that the problems of
Mooladhara are solved. That is very important for all of us.
But this you can't do anywhere else, I think that good. I mean, you can, of course. Mother
Earth is everywhere. But here it is a special place for Mooladara chakra. Where it clears you very
much and fills you up with holiness and auspiciousness. These are the two qualities of Shri
Ganesha which you can imbibe very easily in this place. So, try to sit on the ground as much as you
can. And try to meditate with your left hand towards the Sun and right hand on the Mother Earth.
Can you do that now? Let's see. Left hand towards the sun and right hand on the Mother Earth.
[Pause]
Better. Clears out. [Pause]
So, instead of cleansing it through your Agnya you can cleanse it through your Mooladara.
There are only two ways you can clear out your left side. Is, one is your Agya and another is
Mooladara. This is the easiest thing to do here.
your
And you must have noticed that the people have very good Mooladhara in Maharastra. They
have no problem of their Mooladhara. The way they dance, the way they become innocent. Are so
innocent, [sort of looking as if some]. Gods have come down here. Moreover, this place is
very
vibrated otherwise also because lots of saints have lived here. Have left their vibrations and Shri
Rama and Sita have walked on this soil bare feet. So it is a very vibrated place.
See now, better!
You see how the Mother Earth is sucking in. That's the reason why this tour has a big
significance for all the western people. Because there have been quite a big attack on your
innocence. And that has to be re established and we have to work it out. And it is a very serious
attack. Now they are not only attacking the young people but even children are attacked. All the
time the innocence is in danger. So, one has to become very rich in your innocence and in your
holiness and very powerful, so that you can emit this holiness everywhere.
We Are An International Religion
Now, the second point is that we are an international religion. We don't belong to any country.
None of us belong to any country. That we are not Italians, we are not Indians, we are not
Australians. What we are? We are in the Kingdom of God. So, we are men of God as described by
William Blake. So we are men of God and that we have no bondage to any of these ideas that we
belong to this country or to that country. Once you understand this point in your collectivity, then
you will expand. Not only you will expand but that expansion will give you a kind of confidence in
yourself that we have to take the responsibility of Sahaja Yoga. It's alright, what I get in Sahaja
Yoga, what I have achieved in Sahaja Yoga. What is my gain, personal gain in Sahaja Yoga? How I
have cured chakras? This is one side of achievement. And the another side is taking the
my
responsibility. We have to spread Sahaja Yoga all over. So, the culture of Sahaja Yoga is to be
13
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-13.txt 
 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India),
learnt. If we do not have that culture within us, then people are not going to listen to
us. As it is, I see your faces shining. I mean, people see your faces and they say these
are like lotuses. These people are blooming. So beautiful they are. But, apart from
that, in your personality there should be that magnetism which expresses your
responsibility which is the gravity part of it. As the Mother Earth has got gravity,
she has got this power of gravity also. So, that gravity should be there within us.
On the whole if you see Indians as they are they have many funny funny type
of politicians and also we have lots of kinds of cunning people for ruling us.
Because they are very simple people. Are extremely simple and very innocent. So,
only the cunning can rule such people. And such cunning are exploiting these
simple people here. But that doesn't mean that people are bad. They are too good
and that's why anybody can come on this country and can rule us. In the same way
now these all the muck of this place, all the rakshashas have now become
politicians. And they are trying to rule this country and the poverty remains at the
same level as poverty. There is no concern for the poor people really. Because they
want even to just exploit that poverty for their own purpose. That whatever
the situation, there is one thing for sure that these are very simple hearted, very open
hearted, loving, affectionate people. And very generous. They have very little to give
but whatever they have they want to give you. And this is specially in Maharastra. I
see this culture is there. Even the poorest of poor will try to contribute something just
to make you comfortable, without any grudging, without any grumbling.
when we become
innocent we
should not judge
be
may
ourselves that, if
we are innocent
we will be
So, when we become innocent we should not judge ourselves that, if we are
innocent we will be exploited. Nobody can exploit the saint. Nobody can. If you
allow somebody, like I allow people to exploit Me, because I like to play about.
They think they are exploiting Me. I say, “Alright, I know I am being exploited".
exploited. Nobody
can exploit the
66
So, that is also you should see that side where the humanity is preserved
already, it is still preserved. They are not exposed to these ideas of advancement
where you can overpower other people economically or politically or try to sort of
dominate the whole world. Even economics can dominate. So, they have no sense
of that. So, the humanity is still in the same innocent child like character. And they
exist very well. They are not sick people. They are very healthy despite all kinds of
mosquitoes and bugs and politicians. All sorts of parasites. But they still exist
happily always laughing.
saint.
In the same way we have to understand that in Sahaj culture we are innocent
people. We don't want to harm anyone. We don't want to trouble anyone. We are
peaceful people and we are joyous people. We have to enjoy our own personality,
and enjoy our collectivity. The sacrifices that we make here is practically nil I think,
14
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-14.txt 
 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India),
but the gain is quite a lot, if you develop that witness state within yourself. And that is very, very
easily developed in this country because there is no, no more any pressures, you see. Like a wheel
moves very fast and the centre of the wheel is a quiet centre. If you are on your centre then you see
the wheel moving you don't mind. But to immediately jump on to that center is difficult in the west
I see. Because the pressures are too much. The Wheel is moving too fast and you cannot take your
attention to the center of it, you see. But if you go to a quiet place where the pressures are not much
of time or of any such bindings then gradually the attention moves to the center. That's why people
go to the Himalayas where there is peace. In that peace you can reach your own peace better. And
if you can establish that peace in your meditation here, then I am sure you can go back, to that fast
moving wheel also and you will be on your center. So take the full advantage of this tour.
Don't worry t0o much about other things other comforts that you have in the west. But think
of the comfort of the heart, comfort of the mind. And that will really help you a lot. Here I would
say you should walk about little bit, walking exercises. Go about explore little bit and see for
yourself. This is the reason I am insisting on all these people that they don't want to stay in the city.
Take them out of the city. This is a very good chance. Because in England even if you go outside, I
mean, so cold, you can't just sit like this. Or it may start raining that you have to sit with an
umbrella on your head like that. But this climate has given us this. This beautiful climate has given
this country the possibility of developing inner being more than outer being. Because we don't
have to fight the nature. The nature is so kind. You know you can live on a tree here. You don't have
to fight to get to the stores for food. No. You can get here around something, eat it, live here. Fruits
and some things are quite available. So the life becomes much easier here. And then people don't
think of outside things. But they have to think about inner thing, just automatically, you see, when
the life is simple. You enter inside and see for yourself because the enquiry starts, 'Why this life?
Why am I here? What am I supposed to do?' That's why in the beginning I asked you the question,
"Tell Me, what is the advantage of this tour?" But you jump in the sea, of the ocean of joy and you
just forget every purpose of the visit. [Shri Mataji smiles]
Greatest event of spiritual world
Now the most important thing is that Sahaja Yoga is the greatest event of spiritual world,
where all the cosmos, all the gods and goddesses and all the angels and incarnations and prophets,
all are busy working it out within you and without. If you could easily reflect My brain back on
some screen, you might be able to see them, all of them, sitting down there and working on it. We
have some photographs like that. So, the whole of Virata is working behind the stage and you are
on the stage. So one has to be very careful and alert that we do not divert our attention into
something which is very mundane and very gross. We have to become subtler and subtler here.
Because other pressures are not here. For example, now I lived in England and I know what it is
than anywhere else. There are no servants. There is nobody to look after you. Early in the morning
whether you are old or young you have to make your own tea. You have to clean your kitchen. You
15
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-15.txt 
 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India),
have to do all the work all the time. That's why I think people don't want to have
homes also there. Because if you have a home then you have to do all this nonsense.
So, they live in the homes somehow for 5 days and then run away for two days
somewhere in a hotel or some place. But here it is very comfortable. You don't have
to do any washing, nothing. Now for example, if you have to run your own
restaurant you have to work very hard. Here somebody is running for you, you are
not doing anything so there is no tapasya too.
But in this all enjoyment and everything that you see, as you see these trees it
looks so nice and happy. But behind that is a great movement of their roots down
going towards the source of life. That is what I would say today, that you must
meditate every morning whenever it is possible for you. Of course, the sleep is
much less for you but you can sleep in the buses. I have seen you all were dozing off
[Shri Mataji laughs]. I am not surprised because you must all be very tired. And I
am also with you all the time and perhaps, I do much more than you can do because
you may sleep at 2'0 clock but I have to sleep at 5'0 clock. There is a three hours
difference between you and me. But, despite that you can feel very fresh if you can
really meditate. It is like a bath. In your innocence, in your beautiful personality
and the whole of tiredness and pressures vanish. Even the dancing is a very good
way of clearing out your pressures. Because in the dance you go into thoughtless
awareness and also in the joy. The joy is so fulfilling that the joy of spirit is much
more than the joy of any worldly comforts or also of physical comforts. It gives you
physical comfort. It gives you mental comfort and it gives you also the spiritual
comfort. So, try to be more a witness, detached from yourself, watching everything.
you can feel very
fresh if you can
really meditate. It
is like a bath. In
your innocence, in
your beautiful
personality and
the whole of
This is the purpose of our tour here, you, to understand each other from all the
countries we have come here. We are all of the same Mother. We are all brothers
and sisters and we are here to enjoy each others company. Then there are other
Indians. Also you must talk to them. See how they are cooking. The ladies should
go and help them if possible. Let's have if we can do some vegetables for you. Or,
they now are tying up a... say a pandal here you can all go and help them and just
become one with them. You should not think that you are guests all the time. Of
course, you are. They would not like you to do it though, they think you are all
guests, special guests. And even if you do little bit, even if you would
like to carry my cup back, they would say, "No, no, no, we will." So that is the idea,
Indian idea of a guest is. But, let's have our western idea little bit about guests.
Where the guests have to pay for everything. And do all the household work also.
So, the whole working of Sahaja Yoga becomes easier and very much enjoyable, if
you take responsibilities. And have a rapport with the organizers here. It is so, I
tiredness and
pressures vanish.
I
would
say
99
16
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-16.txt 
 Conversation with yogis, Aurangabad (India),
would say the leaders should meet the organizers when they come here. There are many little, little
things they were asking Me that, how are they going to do for their washings and what are we
going to do? What is the date we should appoint for their washing? So, all these things must be
talked over and a rapport must be established about all the problems you have and what we can do,
about say our movements, where we have to go and how we can organize it and how we can help it.
So there is a Sort of proper intermingling and coordination and a rapport between you people
and the organizers here so that there is minimum trouble for you and minimum trouble for them.
For example, yesterday it was, I told that there will be a man waiting at 'Veeru', that is what you
call the Ellora caves. But you had no time to go to Ellora. But just on the way if you had started.
Three people we had put there at the station as soon as the buses come here bring them directly.
But you had to spend one hour going that way and one hour coming back. So, you can imagine two
hours you
would have saved yesterday nicely. But, doesn't matter, it has to happen, has to happen.
Moreover, when you are going to a place, you are carrying vibrations everywhere. You are giving
your vibrations. And when the people see you specially the Indians half baked intellectuals when
they see you, they start thinking that we are still half baked, how is it these people have taken to
Sahaja Yoga and we are still sitting on our foolish ego thinking that we know much more than
anybody else. That has also a very good effect. The way you sang Marathi songs the other day, it
really created a great impress on the people. Now, tonight again there is a public program. I will be
busy with the press and all sorts of things. But, you go and enjoy your bath and your swimming in
that lake which is nearby here. But don't go too far because may be in the center, it has rained so
much so they were saying about 55 feet is alright, but, may be there might be lot of mire in the
center of that lake. So, better keep to the what you call the shores of it. Not too far and you can have
a nice bath there. Enjoy your bath and you come back here and have your lunch.
But one thing you have to remember is that Indians are very happy if you eat well. If you don't
eat well, they think that they have not made the food well. And that's what they were all the time
asking, "We hope they have liked the food, we hope they have liked the food."I said, "They are all
right. Put less chilies, that's all." But little chilies are very good, Because of Your constipation. I
think little chilies will help you because normally people get constipation if you don't take chilies.
Indians never suffer from this disease because, they have always a little chilies in their food. Little
chilies, is alright. You can develop a little taste for chilies, is alright. It cleanses you and it has
vitamin C also in it. So, it is quite good for colds and other things. Now, anybody who wants to
drink water should take it from the proper places and on the way if you feel thirsty you should take
your own water of course, but apart from that if you need you can just take aerated water. Because
it's rained so much that water has got very polluted. So, don't drink any water anywhere unless and
until you are sure about it. The rest of the food is all done well. So, there is nothing to worry. But, don't
buy anything on the road or anything and eat them. Just whatever is cooked for you I think should be
sufficient and enjoy that so that your stomach is kept well and you enjoy the best of your health.
So, May God bless you all.
17
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-17.txt 
 कि
शु
निराकार-साकार स्वरूप
परम पूज्या श्रीनिर्मला माँ भगवती आदिशक्ति का
महामाया रूप हैं। स्वयं परमेश्वरी माँ साकार रूप में पृथ्वी
पर अवतरित हुई, उनके शरीर में समस्त देवी-देवताओं
का वास है।
४ मार्च १९७९
सिं्ककक
1525
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-18.txt 
 निराकार-साकार स्वरूप
साकार रुप में विभिन्न देवी - देवताओं की मूर्तियों की पूजा करने की भी विशेष विधि होती है। इनमें
प्राणप्रतिष्ठा की जाती है तब इन्हें मंदिरों में स्थापित करते हैं। पूजा में जल, चंदन, रोली, अक्षत,
नैवेद्य
पुष्प
( भोग) दीप और धूप इन अष्ट पदार्थों को श्रद्धा भाव से देव प्रतिमा को अर्पण किया जाता है।
परम पूज्या श्री निर्मला माँ भगवती आदिशक्ति का महामाया रुप हैं। स्वयं परमेश्वरी माँ साकार रुप में
पृथ्वी पर अवतरित हुई, उनके शरीर में समस्त देवी- देवताओं का वास है। हम सहजियों को परमेश्वरी माँ के
साक्षात स्वरुप की पूजा का सौभाग्य प्राप्त हुआ है। पूज्य श्री माँ की पूजा-अर्चन द्वारा समस्त देवी शक्तियों
की आराधना हो जाती है। श्री माँ ने स्वयं हमें पूजा विधि बताई है। पू० माँ के चित्र महत्त्वपूर्ण है हम सहजी
श्रद्धापूर्वक उसकी पूजा करते हैं ।
परमपूज्य श्रीमाताजी ने हमें इस विषय में बहुत विस्तार से समझाया है।
सनातन धर्म और आर्य धर्म आदि में सदियों से झगड़े चले आ रहे हैं।... अब निराकार साकार की बात
थोड़ी सी समझा दें, तो ये झगड़े खत्म हो जाएँगे।
जिस वक्त हमारी पिंगला नाड़ी बनायी गयी... हमारे राइट साइड में उस वक्त ये पाँच तत्त्व जो थे,
वायु,
उनकी जाग्रत करने की बात थी। आप पाँच तत्त्व जानते हैं जिससे सारी सृष्टि बनायी गयी (आकाश,
अग्नि, पृथ्वी और जल)। इनको जाग्रत करना था इसलिये यज्ञ वरगैरह हमारे वेदों में किये गए, स्मृतियाँ पढ़ी
गयी हैं। यज्ञों में, ये पाँच तत्त्व हैं इसको जाग्रत किया गया| ये पाँच तत्त्व जाग्रत करना जरूरी चीज है। अग्नि
को जाग्रत करना था, पानी को जाग्रत करना था क्योंकि इनकी जागृति के कारण ही मनुष्य इनका इस्तेमाल
कर सकता था। उसके बाद ही खेती बाड़ी शुरु हुयी।
आज का साइन्स भी इसी वजह से मनुष्य के समझ में आया। अगर हमारी पिंगला नाड़ी जाग्रत न होती
तो हम कभी भी साइन्स न सोच पाते ना हम यह समझ पाते कि पाँच तत्त्वों को हम किस तरह इस्तेमाल करें ।
बिजली कैसे बनाए और किस तरह से हम इस अग्नि का इस्तेमाल करे, अग्नि तक का हमें पता न था, हम
अग्नि भी न बना पाते। ये सब हम बना सके इसलिए राइट साइड की पूजा होती है। इसलिए यज्ञ होते रहे और
निराकार में जो ये पाँच शक्तियाँ हैं तो निराकार ही पूजा होती रही उस ज़माने में।
19
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-19.txt 
 निराकार-साकार स्वरूप
लेकिन उस में जब आगे लोगों ने सोचा कि जागृत कर लिया, अब आगे क्या? तो फिर मनन की चीज
शुरु हुई। तब फिर सेंट्रल पथ पर आ गए। जब सेन्ट्रल पथ पर सुषुम्ना नाड़ी पर चढ़नी शुरु हुई तो उन्हें
दिखाई देने लगा कि ये देवी-देवता इस जगह पर बैठे हुए हैं। ये जो पाँच तत्त्व बने हैं इन्हीं से इन चक्रों की
बाडीज़ भी बनी हैं। इनकी जो शरीर रचना है वो तो इन्हीं पाँच तत्त्वों से बनी है।
तो जब इन्होंने इन तत्त्वों को जानना शुरु किया तो देखा कि इनके देवता हैं, तब इन्होंने मनन विधि में
उन देवताओं को जानना शुरु
एक के बाद एक, एक के बाद एक। तब इन्होंने कहना शुरु कर दिया
किया।
कि यह साकार भी है तो निराकार से साकार पर लोग उतरने लग गए। जैसे-जैसे चेतना बढ़ती गयी वैसे वैसे
लोग आने लग गए। उसके बाद साकार पर जो आ गए... तो इसकी पूजा कर उसकी पूजा कर,
Ritualism
आ गया अंधश्रद्धा आ गयी, धर्मान्धता आ गई, बड़ा बुरा हाल हो गया।
तब से एक बड़ा भारी आन्दोलन हुआ, इतना ही नहीं मोहम्मद साहब जैसे लोग संसार में पैदा हुए,
क्राइस्ट संसार में आए। इन्होंने सबसे कहा कि निराकार ही ठीक है, साकार को खत्म करो। हांलाकि
बड़ा
गोपनीय है ये सब कुछ इतना बाईबल में लिखा हुआ है, जो कुछ पृथ्वी ने बनाया हुआ है और जो कुछ
आकाश ने बनाया है उसका प्रतिरुप तो बनाइये, ये बड़ी मार्मिक चीज़ है । इसको एक ईसाई लोग समझें तो
समझ लें कि मूर्ति पूजा क्या है? अब पृथ्वी ने कौन सी चीज़, बनायी है? उसकी प्रतिरुप कर के उसकी पूजा
नहीं करना चाहिए।... जितने स्वयंभू लिंग हैं ये पृथ्वी ने स्वयं बनाए हैं, और इसके प्रतिरुप आपने जो बनाए
भी वो पूजनीय होता ही नहीं क्योंकि वह imperfect है। इसका भी co - efficent होता है, इस आकार का भी
Co-efficent होता है। उस आकार के कारण ही चैतन्य बहता है। और हू-बहू वैसा आकार बनाना असम्भव
है और जो बनाता है वो भी realized soul होना चाहिए और वो उसे बेचना नहीं चाहिए उसको। इसलिए
जितने भी मूर्तियों की हम पूजा करते हैं, अधिकतर इस हिसाब से जीरों हैं... इसलिए मूर्ति पूजा का खण्डन
है।
अब काबा के अन्दर जो पत्थर है वो साक्षात शिवलिंग है। पृथ्वी से निकला हुआ शिवलिंग है वो।
उसे मोहम्मद साहब जानते थे और जितने भी शिवलिंग हैं वो साक्षात है जिसको देखिए वही उसकी मूर्ति
बना ले, मिट्टी बना ले, पत्थर का बना ले, ये बनाने की इजाजत नहीं है। इसकी मूर्ति पूजा वर्जित है , इसलिए
मूर्तिपूजा बाधक है। ...ऐसी मूर्तियों की पूजा नहीं होनी चाहिए साकार परमात्मा नहीं होते, यह कहना बहुत
गुलत बात है। इसका मतलब यह है आपने वन साइडेडनेस ले ली।
समझ लीजिए हम आपसे कहें कि शहद को खोज लाएँ तो हम आपसे पहले फूलों का वर्णन करें कि
20
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-20.txt 
 फूल ऐसा होना चाहिए, वैसा फूल मिलेगा, उन में से शहद ले आइए । आप गए और देख के चले आए कि हाँ
भई फूल मिल गया। अब फूलों की ही पूजा करने लग गए । इससे शहद आपको नहीं मिलेगा। बातचीत से
शहद नहीं मिल सकता। सिर्फ फूलों की बातचीत होती रही... शहद नहीं मिलता बातचीत से ... तो उन्होंने
कहा शहद की बात करते हैं, तो दूसरी बात शुरु कर दी निराकार की वो भी बातचीत तो बातचीत ही रह गयी
दिमागी ज़मा खर्च आप चाहे शहद की बात करो, चाहे फूल की बात करो, आपको शहद नहीं मिल सकता
जब तक आप स्वयं मधुकर न हो जाए। जब तक आप स्वयं ही मधु को पाने के योग्य न हो जाएँ तब तक
आपको शहद नहीं मिल सकता। फूल भी जुरूरी है और शहद भी जुरूरी है और शहद पाने के लिए आपका
वो होना जुरूरी है जिसे मधुकर कहते हैं ।
अब उस जूमाने में या पिछले जमाने में जब हम अपने पाँच तत्त्वों को प्रबुद्ध कर रहे थे (निराकार) उस
चीज़ को लेकर आज झगड़ा करने की कोई ज़रूरत नहीं। वह भी सही था और यह भी सही है, बिल्कुल सही
है कि परमेश्वर अवतार के रूप में संसार में आकर मनुष्य का उद्धार करते हैं- यह भी बिल्कुल सनातन बात
है और यज्ञ करना भी सनातन बात है जिसके कारण आप थे पाँच elements हैं अपने अन्दर में उनकी शुद्धि
करें क्योंकि जब आपके चक्र शुद्ध नहीं हुए तो मेरा कहना भी व्यर्थ है । वो भी जरूरी चीज़ है और आत्मा को
जानना भी जुरूरी चीज है।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 4 मार्च 1979, देहरादून
अपने हृदय को स्वच्छ करने के लिए हवन का विधान है -
ललिता पंचमी" पूजा - ललित का मतलब है सुन्दर, अति सुंदर, गौरी जी का नाम है। कल गणेश जी
का जन्म हुआ है इसलिये आज "ललिता पंचमी'" को गौरी जी का दिन मनाया जाता है। वैसे भी आप जानते
१।
हैं कि मेरी कुण्डलिनी माने कुण्डलिनी का नाम ललिता है। लालित्य सौन्दर्य को कहते हैं, मुनष्य वही सुन्दर
होता है जिसमें sense of gratitude (उपकार बुद्धि) होती है। जिस इन्सान में sense of gratitude जरा भी न
वह इन्सान पशुवत है.. कैसी अजीब चीज़ है कि इंसान अपने से इस तरह compromise कर लेता है,
वो अपने अन्दर का जो लालित्य है उसे भी नहीं पहचानता और अपने अंदर जो अग्लीनेस ugliness हैं उसके
साथ रहता है हरदम... आपके अंदर जो गंदे तत्त्व हैं उन पर आप जी रहे हैं, उसे हम लोग भूत कहें, बाधा कहें
कुछ भी कहें। ये आदत लग जानी चाहिए हमारे अंदर, सब सहजयोगियों के अंदर कि हमारी गंदगी की हम
सफाई करें।
आज बड़ा शुभ दिन है ...आज श्री गणेश का स्मरण कर के हम लोग हवन करेंगे, अपने हवन को
.... ...
पूरी तरह से सम्पन्न करेंगे। ...मुझे आशा है कि इस यज्ञ से इस हवन से हम लोगों के हृदय स्वच्छ हो जाएंगे
और हमारी उत्क्रांति में बहुत मदद मिलेगी।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 5.2.76 , बंबई
21
the
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-21.txt 
 प्रचलित धार्मिक अनुष्ठानों के मूल तत्व
जीवन में कुछ घटनाएं होनी होती हैं, जीवन ऐसा ही है। किसी की मृत्यु होनी होती है, सभी लोग एक
साथ तो मरते नहीं। जो भी जन्मा है उसकी मृत्यु होनी ही है। न जाने क्यों लोगों ने मृत्यु को इतना महत्त्व दे दिया
है। यह भी केवल एक क्षण है जिससे व्यक्ति गुजर जाता है और कपड़े बदल कर वापिस आ जाता है।"
"हिन्दुस्तान की अपनी बहुत अच्छी परम्पराएँ हैं पर कुछ चली आती हुई गलत परम्परायें भी हैं... उनको
११
हमने ज्यादा जकड़ लिया है बनिस्बत उनके जो सही है।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, फरवरी 1981
'कर्मकाण्ड बहुत अधिक है। हिन्दू धर्म में कर्मकांडो का बाहुल्य है। आप दाँए बैठे, बाँए को बैठे, इस
समय ये कार्य करें तथा अन्य बहुत सी चीजें। आपकी बहन की मृत्यु होने पर कितने दिन रहना है और
भूखा
पति की मृत्यु पर कितने दिन? जो चला गया वो चला गया समाप्त। शरीर समाप्त हो जाता है तो आपका इतने
दिनों व्रत करना बिल्कुल गलत है। व्रत करने से हो सकता है आपके अंदर भूत प्रवेश कर जाएं। मैं तो ये कहूँगी
कि इन कर्मकाण्डो का सृजन करने वाले लोग... अत्यन्त भौतिक एवं अर्थहीन जीवन व्यतीत करते हैं ।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 23.4.2000 टर्की
इस कदर दकियानूसीपना अपने देश में इस कदर अंधापन है इस मामले में... ब्राह्मणाचार और स्त्रियाचार
कहते हैं कि इस तरह हम लोग ढँक गए हैं कि छोटी-छोटी बातों में नाराज़ हो जाते हैं।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, फरवरी 1981
हमारी जकड़ जो है वो है अन्ध श्रद्धाएँ। किसी भी चीज़ में हमने विश्वास कर लिया तो वह परमविश्वास
हो जाता है... वही मन्दिरों के चक्कर, वही मस्जिदो के चक्कर, वही गुरुद्वारे के चक्कर। अरे भई अस्पताल में
जाने से आप ठीक हो जाएगें? दवाई का नुस्खा पढ़ने से आप ठीक हो जाएँगे क्या?? दवा लीजिए दवा- "कहे
११
नानक बिन आपा चीन्हें मिटे न भ्रम की काई" बस पढ़ते जाओ उससे क्या भ्रम मिट जाएगा? कोई बाइबिल पढ़
रहा है, उधर कोई कुरान पढ़ रहा है, उधर ग्रंथ साहब पढ़ रहे हैं, कोई कुछ पढ़ रहा है, कुछ खोपड़ी में तो जाता
ही नहीं क्यांकि आपके अन्दर आत्मा का जागरण ही नहीं हुआ। आत्मा की जाग्रति के बाद धर्म आत्मसात होता
है।.. इस शक्ति को हमें प्राप्त करना है... सिर्फ कुंडलिनी जागरण मात्र करना है।"
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 23.3.92 , दिल्ली
हम भारतीय लोगों के साथ एक समस्या है कि हम बंधनों में जकड़े हुए हैं। हमारे सम्मुख इतने आदर्शों
के होते हुए भी हम ऊपर नहीं उठ पाते।... हमें समझना चाहिए कि सभी महान अवतरण, पीर और पैगम्बर इस
जीवन वृक्ष को पोषित करने के लिए आए... आपको इस सबमें विश्वास करना होगा। कुंडलिनी जाग्रति विकास
की जीवन्त क्रिया है- अन्तिम उपलब्धि।
प.पू.श्रीमाताजी, 6.12.91 मद्रास, खण्ड IV, 1995
22
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-22.txt 
 Published & Printed by
Nirmal Transformation Pvt. Ltd.
10, Bhagyachintamani Co-op. Housing Society, Paud Road, Kothrud,
Pune, Maharashtra, India 411 038. Ph.: 020 - 65226031, 65226032, 25286537
email:sale@nitl.oc.in, website:www.nitl.co.in (For queries contact on above address)
 2014_Yuvadrishti_Mx_I.pdf-page-23.txt 
 The birthday of Your Mother, and all such
celebrations have a very deep significance, because
on such occasions, special vibrations flow in the
atmosphere. When all the celestial bodies, the
Eternal Personalities, Gods and Goddesses, sing the
praise, and that's how the whole atmosphere is
filled with mirth and happiness.
H.H.Shri Mataji, 23.03.1980.
