TRANSCRIPT OF MARRIAGE COUPLETS JANUARY 19, 1985 Shri Mataji (to someone): I vibrated some water for you; I hope it helps your nabhi. (in Marathi): So, is it done? Who? Taught them? Whom? “ Nava ghya” (Literally take the name – also called “ukhana”, this is an old wedding custom of the Maharashtrian community in India to subtly announce the name of your spouse. Married couples recite rhyming couplets after the ceremony and later on, during festive gatherings, in which the names of their spouses figure). Shri Mataji (in Marathi): In Marathi? Who. Someone: Dalvi. Shri Mataji: Yes, take it (the name). Come on, take the name in Marathi. If the husband is English, take it in English. [A Sahaja Yogi is reciting a couplet, but this one is in praise of Shri Mataji, not an ukhana]. Sahaja Yogi: Phate Geli, Phala Geli, Nash Hoto Thanana, Ayushacha Nash Hoto, Nirmal Naav Mhanana (The trees and fruits are gone, there is destruction, as life is being destructed, please take the name of Nirmal). Shri Mataji: Life is destructed, says Nirmal's name? Sahaja Yogis: Take the name, say the name. Shri Mataji (in English): It is that the time is passing fast. Every moment is going away. It is best is to take the name of Nirmala. [Applause]. Shri Mataji: Yes, go ahead. [Inaudible. Someone is reciting in English]. Sahaja Yogi: Can you repeat, please? [Inaudible]. Shri Mataji: Warren is practising well. (Laughter all around) Another Sahaja Yogi: He is all attention. Shri Mataji: All right. The next. Sahaja Yogini Bride (in English): My husband’s name is Paul. There will be nobody else at all. Sahaja Yogi (repeating to Shri Mataji as the words are inaudible): My husband’s name is Paul. There will be nobody else at all. Shri Mataji: Nobody. Sahaja Yogi: Nobody else at all. Shri Mataji: Good. [Laughter all around]. Sahaja Yogi: Coordinate, coordinate. Louder. Sahaja Yogi Groom: I just now married my wife, Wendy. I had to because she is so friendly. [Sahaja Yogi repeats to Shri Mataji]. Sahaja Yogini Bride: I just now married my husband John. He is the only one. Sahaja Yogi: Cannot hear you. [Sahaja Yogi repeats to Shri Mataji]. Shri Mataji: That is good poetry coming out. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: You do not have this custom though. I think I started well. [Laughter]. Sahaja Yogini Bride (in Marathi): Ashiwardache sumane vechali khali vakun, Atul Ravache Nav Ghete, Shri Mataji Ani Sarvancha Maan Rakhun (I bend down to pick the flowers of blessings, I take the name of Atul, respecting the honour of Shri Mataji and everyone else). Another Sahaja Yogi: Name, please. [Inaudible]. Shri Mataji: What? [Inaudible]. Shri Mataji: With respect to Mother, I take the name. [Sahaja Yogini repeats the couplet. Sahaja Yogi repeats it to Mother]. Shri Mataji: You must collect the flowers of blessings by bending down. I take the name of, what is the name? Sahaja Yogi: Atul. Shri Mataji: I take the name of my husband Atul, with all respect to my Mother. You see it is said that, because my mother has asked me, so with respect I take the name of my husband. It is like that. [Applause]. Shri Mataji: It is a very beautiful poem. Sahaja Yogi Groom (in Marathi): Ya Mangal Dini Asmita Sampavi, Mhanun Mi Smitache Naav Gheto Matajincha Charani (On this auspicious day I take the name of Smita at the Feet of Mataji so that my ego identification is finished). Shri Mataji: Wah, wah, wah. [Applause]. Shri Mataji: Now Asmita. What is the English word for it? What is the English word for Asmita? It is a spiritual word. Sahaja Yogi: You could say mirthless. Shri Mataji: Yes? Sahaja Yogi: Mirthless. Smita smiles.. Shri Mataji: Asmita has a different meaning. So, what does Asmita mean? Yes? Sahaja Yogi: No Smita, Asmita. Sahaja Yogi: Self-respect. Shri Mataji: Pride? Sahaja Yogis: Ego. Durabhimaan (absence of pride). Shri Mataji: Yes? Sahaja Yogi: Durabhimaan. Shri Mataji: Durabhimaan. Asma, should be said asma. Should be called ego. Asmita is a subtler version. Sahaja Yogi: No it is not. Shri Mataji: What is the abstract for ego? The essence of ego? Sahaja Yogini: Egotism. Sahaja Yogi: It is a cult. Shri Mataji: No, no, no, no. So whatever it is, is the essence of ego. The essence of ego. I take the name of Smita, means the smiling grace. As I finished with asmita, Asmita means the essence of ego. That is rather difficult to translate but that is what it is. (in Marathi): Yes, take the name. Sahaja Yogi Groom: By Mataji’s choice, Zorana is my bride, She is leaving left nabhi for the vishuddhi right side. (Shouts of laughter). Shri Mataji: That is a good one. That is a tremendous one. [Mother cannot stop laughing]. Shri Mataji: It is a very good one. Very good one. I think everyone must have understood it; I need not translate. That is a very good one, I must say. Let us have it. Another Sahaja Yogi: Repeat it, repeat it. Sahaja Yogi Groom: By Mataji’s choice, Zorana is my bride, She is leaving left nabhi for the vishuddhi right side. Shri Mataji: That is himself, right vishuddhi. And she is left nabhi. All right. Great. Ah, that is a great one. Now let us have it. Zorana? Zorana: I love Michael because he came to me, He was sent to me by the blessings of Adishakti. Shri Mataji: Great, sweet, sweet. Very good. [Applause]. Shri Mataji: All right. Let us have it. Sahaja Yogi: [Inaudible]. Shri Mataji (in Marathi): What was that? Another Sahaja Yogi: Repeat. Sahaja Yogi Groom: My lovely wife is Nutan. Now my life is sweeter. Shri Mataji: Nutan. Another Sahaja Yogi: Lovely wife is Nutan. Shri Mataji: Good. Sahaja Yogini Bride: You are my Rama, sweetheart Because Shri Mataji sent me as Sita. [Laughter and applause]. Shri Mataji: It is a little one. But that is only, she is only eighteen years. Very sweet girl. Purna(?) Sahaja Yogi Groom: I love Cindy like no other Because like me she's recognised Mother. [Applause]. Shri Mataji: That is a good one. Sahaja Yogi: It is improving. Another Sahaja Yogi: It is catching up. [Applause]. Sahaja Yogini Bride: I love my husband Nick, He makes my heart go tick. [Prolonged laughter and applause]. Shri Mataji: That is a good one. Yes, good. Sahaja Yogi: Once more for this. Another Sahaja Yogi: You repeat the word, Nick, so it will be a tick, tick. [Laughter]. Sahaja Yogini Bride: I love my husband Nick, He makes my heart go tick. Shri Mataji (in Marathi): Poor [inaudible], he blushed. Sahaja Yogi Groom: Now I have married Sheila, I know I have become crazy. Sahaja Yogi: Good. Sahaja Yogini Bride: Mother’s love says clearly, I love John dearly. Shri Mataji: Mother’s love says? Clearly? Sahaja Yogini Bride: Mother’s love says clearly, I love John dearly. Sahaja Yogi: Mother’s love says clearly, I love John dearly. Sahaja Yogi Groom: I love you, Patricia, I always want to kiss ya. [Laughter all around]. Shri Mataji: What? Sahaja Yogi: I will always want to kiss you. Shri Mataji: Good idea. Sahaja Yogi: Good idea [inaudible]. Sahaja Yogi Groom: Patricia, I always want to kiss you. [Laughter]. Sahaja Yogini Bride: I love you, Otto. From now on, loving Otto will be my motto. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: Ah? Sahaja Yogi: Loving Otto will be my motto. Sahaja Yogi Groom: I will speak in Marathi. Shri Mataji: Yes, take it in Marathi. Sahaja Yogi: In Marathi. Groom: Matajincha photola suvarnachi frame, Yoginicha naav ghetto, khara, khara prem (Mataji’s photo has a golden frame, I take Yogini’s name, with true love). Sahaja Yogis: Wah, wah. [Applause]. Groom: Love of Mother is spreading the masses through Kundalini, Washington is going to get it through Yogini. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. [Laughter and applause]. Shri Mataji: Right thing to the right place. Right idea. Bride: Now that I have Bhaskar, What more could I ask for. [Laughter and applause]. Shri Mataji: Bhaskar and ask for. Groom: May we get close together Christine, Through Mother, She is supreme. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. [Applause]. Bride: I love you, Anthony, Because you have shone Mother's lamp on me. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. [Applause]. Groom: There is a word in Hindi, “girgit”. Girgit means chameleon. Now, I love Gilgit because she does not change colours like a girgit. Bride: Nitin, you are my husband. To whom laugh and joy are all spent. Sahaja Yogi: Nitin you are my husband. Very good. Shri Mataji: Nitin. Nitin Gupta. Groom: Natalie’s love is not hard to coax. Because she laughs at all my jokes. [Laughter and applause]. Sahaja Yogis: Repeat. Groom: Natalie’s love is not hard to coax. Because she laughs at all my jokes. Sahaja Yogi: Oh, she laughs at all my jokes. Very good. Can we have one? [Laughter]. [Bride speaks in German]. Sahaja Yogi: Gregoire. Shri Mataji: Please again, please again. Natalie please again. [Bride repeats and Gregoire translates]. Gregoire: John will hold me by my hand and lead me to the altar of Maya. Something like that. Shri Mataji: Altar of my? Gregoire: Maya. Sahaja Yogi: Maya. Very good. Groom: Nirmala ma ne mujhe aaj ke din diya, France ki ek acchi yogini Sylvia (Mother Nirmal has given me today, A nice Sahaja Yogini from France, Sylvia). Shri Mataji: That is a good one. He says that Nirmala Mother has given me a very good yogini, a very good girl, yogini from France. But the rhyming is very good, diya and Sylvia. Sahaja Yogi: Yes, the rhyming is very good. [Applause]. Shri Mataji: That is a good rhyming. [Bride speaks in French.] Gregoire: That rhymes in French. Avadhut from today on we walk on the same road. [Applause]. Groom: I love you, sweet Dory. There is nothing to feel sorry. [Laughter]. Sahaja Yogi: This is a bit understatement. Groom: I love you, sweet Dory. There is nothing to feel sorry. [Laughter]. Bride: I love you Otto, wherever we will go to. Whatever you say to, I will try to obey you. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: Quite sweet. Sahaja Yogi: German training lady (?). Groom: I love you Maya. I hope I never get lost in your maya. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: Good. Bride: Kanva rishcha ashirvaad, Shakuntalecha maher, Rudolphji ni dila mala saubhAgnyacha aher (The blessings of Kanva Rishi which is the mother’s home of Shakuntala, Rudolph has given me the gift of marital status). Shri Mataji: She says that Kanva rishi’s place, there was the maher? Sahaja Yogi: Mother’s place. Shri Mataji: Mother’s place was found for Shakuntala in the ashram of Kandva and Guiseppe has given me the aher, gift of, what is Saubhaya? Sahaja Yogi: Bliss? Shri Mataji: Of great fortune. Another Sahaja Yogi: Marital bliss. Shri Mataji: Marital bliss. Sahaja Yogi: Marital bliss. Shri Mataji: Given me the gift of marital bliss. Shri Mataji (in Marathi): Marital bliss is not called Saubhagnya. Sahaja Yogi (in Marathi): But it is valid there. Shri Mataji (in Marathi): Correct. Let it be. Does not matter. It is more than marital bliss, it is spiritual married bliss we can say. All right. Who else? Come along now. Let us have it. Groom: I love you Tina very much Because our love is the blessing of Mother Nirmala. Sahaja Yogi: Nirmala. [Laughter]. Bride: My husband, Jean(?) comes from France, Where we had summer, song and dance. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. [Applause]. Shri Mataji: That is very good. Groom: I love you, Selma, you are now called Mohini. That is because you are such a sweet yogini. [Applause]. Bride: I love you, Christopher, Because you are a gift from my Mother. Sahaja Yogi: Good. Shri Mataji: Good, excellent. Now, what else? Finished? Sahaja Yogi: I love you Christopher, Because you are a gift from my Mother. Groom: I love you Sue, That is why I am getting married with you, please give us many "babus" (children). [Laughter]. Sahaja Yogi: Babu. His was very babu. His was very babu. Shri Mataji: Ah? Sahaja Yogini: Bebu, “bacche” (kids). Sahaja Yogi: One more for this. Gregoire: Be careful. Shri Mataji: Gregoire is already suffering from it. [Laughter]. Groom: I love you, Sue, That is why I am getting married to you, please give us many babus. [Laughter]. Bride: Yudas(?), you are always in my heart, Now we will never be apart. Sahaja Yogi: Once more. Bride: Yudas(?), you are always in my heart, Now we will never be apart. Shri Mataji: This is the answer to the babus, is it? [Laughter]. [Groom speaks in German or Russian]. Sahaja Yogi: Yes, Gregoire. Another Sahaja Yogi: Translation, please. Shri Mataji: Who is this now? Gregoire: Can you repeat, please. [Groom repeats in German or Russian]. Gregoire: With Anjali, an angel has come into my heart. But this is not strange because the angel is the name of Hanumana. Shri Mataji: Anjali, yes. Bride: Now I am Mesmo’s wife, And he is my life. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. Sahaja Yogi: One in Marathi. Same Bride: Himalayat barfancha rashi, Mesmoraoanche naav ghete aajcha shubh divshi (There are mountains of snow in the Himalayas, I take the name of Mesmo with respect on this auspicious day). Shri Mataji: Himalayat? Sahaja Yogi: Barfancha rashi. Shri Mataji: Himalayas is covered with heaps of ice. It is a rhyming word, I mean, rashi. I take the name of Mesamirao on this auspicious day. Groom: Lata, Lata, the spirit that we share symbolises our marriages, So let’s always care. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. Shri Mataji: Very good. Bride: Netrarupi niranjanat preetichi lavte phulwat, Michosovache (?) naav ghete karte Sahaja Yogatun suruvaat (In the lamp of my eyes I light the wick of love, Taking the name of Michosov, I make a start in Sahaja Yoga). Shri Mataji: Wah, wah, wah. Sahaja Yogi: Once more. Bride: Netrarupi niranjanat preetichi lavte phulwat, Michosovache (?) naav ghete karte Sahaja Yogatun suruvaat. Shri Mataji: The eyes are lamps and I have put the light in my eyes. In the presence of my husband, whose name I have taken, I start my Sahaja Yoga with this light. But it is done very well, poetically. Groom: I love my wife, Ann, Because of an Indian telegram. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: What is it? Groom: I love my wife, Ann, Because of an Indian telegram. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: What is it? [Prolonged laughter]. Sahaja Yogi (in Marathi): I think he was called here by telegram (to be married). Sahaja Yogi: Once more. Sahaja Yogi: Could we know the contents of the telegram? [Laughter]. Groom: I love my wife, Ann, Because of an Indian telegram. [Laughter, Mother is also laughing]. Shri Mataji: Called by telegram. Sahaja Yogi: He says, I love my wife, Ann, Because of an Indian telegram. Another Sahaja Yogi: Ann or and? Sahaja Yogi: Ann. Shri Mataji: Her name is Ann. So he was called by telegram. Bride: I love you, Luvisha (?), Because you came so quick to India. [Lots of laughter]. Shri Mataji: Who is this one? Gregoire: Yuvisha, he is the Yugoslav boy. He came; was sent by telegram – “come and marry her”. Shri Mataji: Who? Gregoire: Annagret from Munich. Shri Mataji: Oh I see. Good. Groom: I love my Nicole-Ann Because that is our Mother's plan. [Laughter]. Sahaja Yogi: Agreed. Bride: [Inaudible]. Shri Mataji: That is all right. Ask someone else. She is shy. Bride (repeats): Bernard takes us to Shri Mataji. Sahaja Yogi: What is that? Shri Mataji: Bernard, take us to Shri Mataji. Sahaja Yogi: Good. Groom: In the [inaudible/first] my bride was called a lighthouse by dear brother Warren. And therefore I say, I love you, Angelina, Because you brought to light in my life. Shri Mataji: Good. Bride: I love you, John, Because you bring me to the heart of your Mother. Shri Mataji: Good, good. (in Marathi) Are they over? Sahaja Yogi (in Marathi): Nearly over. Groom: Maureen is my love, Her purity shines like a very white dove. Sahaja Yogi: Like a very white dove. Shri Mataji: Great. Bride: Mother has given me Michael, And from this day in my heart lies an angel. Shri Mataji: Good. Michael, angel. [Probable cut in recording or something has happened, laughter]. Shri Mataji: Who is this girl? Sahaja Yogi: Translation. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: You could not do it even once. You could not do it even once. [Groom speaks in French or German]. Gregoire: I love you, Natalie, Because your smile will enlighten our home like the glory of our Mother. [Applause]. Bride: Since we married Scott, my only feelings of marriage would be a big smile. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. Shri Mataji (in Marathi): Over? Sahaja Yogi (in Marathi): No there are still some more. Groom: I love you, Lynne, Because you are the gift which I asked for from the Adi Shakti. Bride: My mother has given me a very big favour, With the love of Vasudeva. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: With the? Sahaja Yogi: Very big favour with the love of Vasudeva. Repeat. Bride: My mother has given me a very big favour, With the love of Vasudeva. Groom: I love you very much Christine Because your heart is very pure and clean. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. Bride: I will always love and believe in, My wonderful husband whose name is Steven. [Laughter]. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. Groom: My wife is called Devi, And she is such a sweetie. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: This is Venugopalan. Groom: My wife is called Devi, And she is such a sweetie. Bride: Asmany (?) is your love, I pray that many people feel our love. Shri Mataji: May God Bless You. Groom: Dear Kay/Sky[?] I thank Mother in every way, For giving Her blessing to this wedding day. Sahaja Yogi: Very good. Once more. Once more. [Applause]. Groom: Dear Kay/Sky[?] I thank Mother in every way, For giving Her blessing to this wedding day. Bride: I thank you Marvin, For your love for this darling. [Laughter]. Shri Mataji: Good. Groom: Katrina, you are the girl I was always looking for, By the blessing of Mother may we grow higher in the spiritual life. Shri Mataji: Very great. [Bride speaks in Italian]. Gregoire or another Sahaja Yogi: I love you Antonio, Because we live in the pure love of our Mother. Groom: Mistrica (?) is in a big shock, [inaudible] set up shop. [Laughter]. Sahaja Yogi: Could you repeat. [Recording ends at this point].