1987-08-07 One Has To Work Hard For Ones Own Country

Nirmala Vidya - 1987-0807 1: Informal Talk - Canada, San Francisco, America, Improve YourselfShri Mataji:I just don’t understand if you own the house (you are the owner of the house) how could they [unclear]...I just don’t understand!Of the 2 children, where are they gone?Just have it ...Are you alright?(Sahaja yogini shares some problem with mother)Shri Mataji: You being to some guru or somewhat?Sahaja yogini: No mother my husband has start Sahaja YogaShri Mataji: I see! You feel vibrations?Sahaja yogini: [unclear]Shri Mataji: Who is your husband?(Sahaja yogini tells the name)TerryShri Mataji: Terry, he is not here now ...Sahaja yogini: No, he has not come this timeShri Mataji: He was here last night?Sahaja yogini: He didn't come here this time He came to see you first time in the National Puja last year.Shri Mataji: Terru!(name) Something here [unclear...] (Then in Marathi)Sahaja yogi: In America, there is a law: If there is a music party after 10 O'clock the neighbours have to be informed. If you don't inform the neighbours they have right which I told him right! You can play the subtle music if you did not like you can talk to the police we can tell next time onwards we won’t play after 10 O’clock. But I would not have the answer to all his questions...I am here from 17 years ...[unclear in Marathi ]

Shri Mataji: Not Rock Music!Sahaja yogi: If there is one-time party...I told him right ...You did not like it right ...You talk to police...Police come you say sorry we will stop the music after 10 o'clock ...Shri Mataji: Love thy neighbour as I said...Sahaja yogi: NO NO I am American citizen...I don't have to answer you all these questions...I am American Citizen ...I have lived here from so many years ...I don’t have to listen to anything ... (Here Sahaja yogi is telling that why should he tell everybody what's going in his house, there are Indians with him or not etc. to his neighbours as he is also living in America from so many years...He has some privacy concerns, and doesn’t like interference of outsiders ...This is what he is trying to explain mother )Shri Mataji: Nobody can enter into my house better tell. This is the house of a diplomat own by a diplomat ...You better behave! Own by a Diplomat...Even if you murder somebody inside nobody can say anything...Diplomats have so many rights you see! That you cannot challenge whether American or...This country is funny you know There is no freedom at all. You go out people is about to shoot you ...& go inside the house police is going to shoot you. What sort of freedom you have ...Sahaja Yogini: [Unclear]...Shri Mataji: Come come ... (to some other person) Sit down ...Sit down ...So where is he now she says?Sahaja yogini: CannadaShri Mataji: Canada ...So what does he say.... your husband? HE doesn’t believe in Sahaja Yoga ...So that may be the reason ...you’re this thing is ...But ...Sahaja yogini: [unclear]I know...what does he say?Sahaja yogini : [unclear]Shri Mataji: Against Sahaja yoga ...then big problem ...You should not ask ...That's the one thing Just don't worry about him ...If he is against Sahaja yoga let him be ...If you go on like this you will be upset all the time ...Your Agnya is catching everything alright! That’s why I wanted to know what the problem was.Sahaja yogini: [Unclear]Shri Mataji: I mean if he is too much troubling you it's better Because as you look to me I mean you don't look very Sahaja in the sense you look upset person Isn't it? So, in that case, I think better you go somewhere and get alright...In case he is so much against Sahaja yoga ...You see my point ...You are Canadian? Where do you live?But what will you do in the collectivity where we live?Sahaja Yogini: Vancouver ...Shri Mataji: Yes Vancouver we have ...How many of you are from Vancouver here? So how do you find Vancouver is doing well. What do you mean by that ...Lauri is there ...and how many of you are there? 7? There in the ashram ...I don’t know why Canadians are so difficult ...What about the Indians in Canada. Are they responsive?But where Michel Nite was what was the place he was in?He had some good Indians there ...But not in Vancouver ...No ...So how we are propagating Sahaja yoga there?Sahaja yogi: [unclear]Shri Mataji: They come down but you didn’t take any public meeting as such?Sahaja yogi: NoShri Mataji: But why don't you try that ...Public meetings ...Is a Good idea ...Tell Lauri ...If she coming to the puja ...So I will talk to her ...You see Canada will be better than America. Because here the people are so scared ...Scared people. Very Scary place ...Everybody is so scared ...So the progress is not very fast...If they scared of something then they will think that Sahaja yoga is another horrible thing or something ...Maybe ...But Canada should work out ...Canada is not that bad. There is a reason so much violence there. Isn't it? And now you are also developing your country quite a lot ...Don't you? You are having factories, lots of factories have been built now...Germans have gone there and have built up a lot of factories ...So I think Canada should do good ...She is Lauri’s daughter?How are you? You are there only in Vancouver? You have gone to New York, isn't it?You were there?Sahaja yogini: NoNo, I see! Somebody told that you are going to go to New York ...Sahaja yogini: [unclear]Shri Mataji: No no for staying in New York ...No ...Someone told me you are going to be there...So what are you doing now?Sahaja yogini: I have just finished my school ...Shri Mataji: So there in Vancouver, What's the class you are going to join? The first year as you call it ...Then what do you want to do? Arts?Sahaja yogini: I really don’t know ...Shri Mataji: But you were happy in Australia? Isn’t it? You were in Australia ...Sahaja yogini: yesShri Mataji: Not so much here ...One has to work hard for one's own country, isn't it? ...Just can't run away! Americans have to work hard ...You can't run away from your own country...That's why you are there ...You took your birth with the understanding. I know it's difficult what you say?I know ...Especially San Francisco is a very difficult place. Nothing can teach them lessons. With AIDS they have become great Martyrs of the crescent of age you see...Very sad thing! They have never known the love of God ...such a sad thing ...Can you imagine such unhappy people...They have not known God, they have not known his love, his blessings...Sahaja Yogi: [unclear]Shri Mataji: What is this? But you have given me ... Alright! What about the cups I have got for you? Distribute cups also ...Alright! For all of them ...Even they can take to Vancouver some of them ...Good idea!Alright! Thank you!What is that? Why to do such a thing? Key to my house ...Is there a key? Alright! You better open ...Thank you.(Some name) You have got my passport?Sahaja Yogi: Tickets alsoShri Mataji: Tickets and passport ...Yes, take it out ..."Shankh”. 2 of them ...What beauty? See the nature ...Beautiful ...So beautiful ...You see ...It's made ...that's how the Kundalini is ....See...And it's 7...1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11...correct should be 11 numbers ...It is god's plan. You can't use it for blowing. How is the stand...?From this side ...Let’s see What is the stands are?Oh, that's fine ...Beautiful What nature ...How it creates? This beauty ...Beautiful ...That’s what I told you this morningAll done at an animal level which is in state of complete “bandhan” and all. “Pashu," they say ...are "pashu”...But human beings are free people they can do what they like themselves... you can see very clearly what they have done. If they want they can destroy themselves very easily, they want they can be master of all these things...for them to decide ...This morning I was telling about them the forest's protocol...In the forest, you have got the tiger as the king. So when the tiger is in that area nothing moves no sound if you find absolutely silent jungle then know that there is tiger sitting somewhere...When the tiger is sleeping ...Absolutely there is no sound ...Tiger itself is a very majestic animal ...It kills an animal always one at a time and about 2 in a month that's all ...The first time it will kill an animal ...Leave it there for the whole night for all the blood to lose out and then it will come back the next day. That's the time when a hunter shoots it ...Now it comes back and eats it as much as it wants to eat that's all. Then finished, for 15-20 days no more eating! Then it goes away ...Leaving the whole animal for others to eat ...Then other animals who are eating flesh come down ...All of them –the foxes, the jackals this that goes on ....till the sparrows this that and ultimately the crows when they eat then it finishes off. Such an understanding of the protocol ...And if there is a tigress, the tiger and tigress can eat one animal or both of them can kill 2 animals ...And when the tiger dies then at least for a month you can see that tiger is dead...Everybody so unhappy because they think that the tiger is dead we have no king ...And even if the king kills for somebody he leaves it for way...Suppose it happens like that so many times a tiger may ill or he might be killed or caught something like that then these people would not eat that animal killed by the tiger ...Nobody touches it. See the amount of "Maryadas" they have. But they are under complete control of God ....Pashu’s they are pashas So to achieve their ultimate freedom, God has given you the freedom...That doesn't mean that you go to hell the fast, faster and fastest. But you will notice very clearly that there is a force going upward in Sahaja yoga, there is a very big sliding down especially the America is the country which is going very down fast But what I feel that other countries are also following them...Like Canada, worse than Canada I say France...There are so many people in France who are absolutely mad and wiered...And they are walking into the streets and they are getting into the bus from the railway station. One fellow walks in talking with himself ...another fellow walks in talking to himself ...The third lady walks in talking to himself loudly very loudly ...I got very surprised I asked Mary as it what's this –Oh they are mad! I said really ...Why are they here with us ...He said you know we are very sympathetic people towards the mad ...But I said What about yourself Are you not sympathetic to yourself ...These people who catch hold of you will throw you away ...Then one lady came in and she started abusing every one... When she started abusing these two also got excited. But they knew how to take a ticket, they knew how to get down, they knew all this...There were 2 men ....were talking about war and they don't know talking about God knows ...So already there is an attack of the negativity on these people I think But apart from that drugs, if you are saved from drugs, AIDS saved from AIDS, then now they are shooting each other. As if very few people are being killed so now they think we should shoot each other finished ...How much it is self-destructing in a collective way...In a collective way there is a scheme of destroying themselves. You should see as Sahaja yogis this point very clearly. Now you all have chosen the path in that path you can save so many people. The worst thing I feel about America is that you can't spread Sahaja Yoga so fast ...People don't have subtleties at all...Yesterday I was talking to Laur, I thought it's the potatoes in his head or what absolutely a man without any subtler understanding ...I mean I could understand an uneducated labour on the street but he is a lawyer if he cannot understand anything subtle then whom do you expect to come to Sahaja yoga. Yesterday I was very disappointed but when I saw you here I again felt No We can try again ...So again this time we are going to come maybe ...I might [unclear/go to Vancouver also ] You have kept 15 days for that altogether I don't know ...I don't have the full program with me. But Do you have? Alright. We have put it...I said I can't .2 years I am not free...Just try again You see when I come you will see the hall will be full ...All the crowds ...Are they mad people I don't understand What is in me that they come there ...Sahaja Yogi: They always come for the program Shri MatajiShri Mataji: But why? What is it? I don’t understand these people ...When I go they just see the photograph [unclear] and the whole hall will be filled and When I go away nobody is there...Sahaja yogi: No discrimination Shri Mataji...No discriminationShri Mataji: I just don’t understand. They don’t respect their realization.In Nov 5th USA to the 12th .....We can increase it to 15th also ...that I am saying to increase it to 15th.But let's see now suppose I come on Nov 5th so where should I come firstSahaja yogi: unclearShri Mataji: Of course.Sahaja yogi: You can come to New York because we assure you ... [unclear]Shri Mataji: Alright or else then from here I can go to Canada. Alright! And then from Canada, I can go to [unclear] Rustom is going to be a new founder. But this Bala business, what to do with Cincinnati...So what we can do: suppose I go to the New York first ...o.k end up in New York would be better...(Suggestions are given by Sahaja yogis in the middle).Alright! Do one thing in New York I don’t have the programs say for eg then I will go in the middle, have the program then come to you people, have the program, go to Canada have the program and then lastly go to New York. Alright.Sahaja yogi: Big Bandhan Shri MatajiShri Mataji: Big BandhanAlright just do that way ...So now supposing I come here so I will be coming to you people now what do you want? Do you want me to come Saturday-Sunday or you want me to come at the day time?Sahaja yogi: We would probably have better response near the weekend...Shri Mataji: Weekend! All right! So the weekend is 8th. 7th and 8th is the weekend. Alright! So I will come at 6th here, no 5th I will come to ...so 7th,8th – 2 days program or you would like 3 days.Sahaja yogi: Whatever you say Shri Mataji.Shri Mataji: What about in Los Angles? We don't have the program in Los anglesAlright! So when do you want to have In the Weekdays or HolidaysSahaja yogi: HolidaysShri Mataji: Holidays alright! So we can do 6th and 7th here and 8th there ...6th, 7th and 8th ...But I can stick here for one day if the people want to see ...So 9th up to 9th (one month), I would be here ...No no, San Francisco will not [unclear]Los Angles and SantiagoNow, if you have to go to Canada which is the better place Santiago or San Francisco?Sahaja yogi: One and the same thing...Shri Mataji: No no, If I have to go from Vancouver which is the easiest place to go? From Which Place?Sahaja yogi suggested San FranciscoSan Francisco is what you think is the possibility of having the program for one day...Alright! So keep it on Tuesday...San FranciscoThen 11th of the night to Canada, Vancouver and 12th I am there...13th, today is 13th ...11, 12, 13...The 14th I will go for Cincinnati...Is the other way round It will be there?Sahaja yogi: yes if you like then New York first, you can come from Cincinnati through Santiago ...Shri Mataji: oh I see that waySahaja yogi: Because it is on the wayShri Mataji: That’s better ! Alright!So from here, we go to Vancouver to Cincinnati and then to New York ...So we are there on the 14th Cincinnati ...14th, 15th New York now ...New York will be 17th, 18th.Then I think we wait for the Spanish program. We have to find that when would they like to have and then decide...Because we can adjust here between these ...There is on the 21st People will go to Briton, London...Sunday is good for London Program. Alright, then you could have it!Briton, London 21st, 22nd Then Cambridge ... is 23rd or you can put it ....like this ....21st you put in Briton and 22nd I could be rest.23rd in London. And 25th Cambridge.Now rest of the thing we will discuss ....in like going to India. Now what I decide do you agree, all of you?That when people go to India they of course pay for their travel but in that money ...travel money also they give for the project money plus they pay for all the sari's, they pay for all the pujas therein...They also pay partly for the silver because with this money I can't buy all the silver I buy ...And we are buying for about 28 Centres...Also, they pay for marriages ...So they pay for the five things apart from their food and their travel. So the whole pressure comes on you. Now for any other thing, we have no money ...Supposing I want to build an ashram anywhere ...I don't know If I can spend my own money ....